
        Bill and Nicki Hancock used to watch the Oklahoma State basketball games on television, just to catch a glimpse of their older son, Will, on the sideline. Will, the sports information director, made life easier for everybody at the press table.
        The parents never worried about the logistics of college sports. The father was in the same business, the man who directed the Final Four every year. He accepted that teams jumped into airplanes, large or small, after road games, eager to get back to campus.
        Early in the evening of Jan. 27, 2001, at home in Kansas City, Mo., for the first time ever, the father found himself preoccupied with the blustery weather in Colorado, where his son would be flying. The mother felt a horrible blast of prairie wind slash directly into her heart, although she did not know why. The news arrived at 10 p.m. -- two players and six other members of the travel party had gone down in the crash of the third team plane.
        (I will pause here to tell you that Bill Hancock is one of the nicest and most capable people I know in sports. He ran 16 Final Fours and now manages the Bowl Championship Series. I saw Will Hancock at college games and at the 2000 Sydney Summer Games. It was very clear that he and his dad were a unit -- friends and colleagues.)
        Somehow the family got through the next days on innate grace and sheer nerve. Bill formulated his own survival mantra: ''Put one foot in front of the other. Heaven is real. Will is there. Believe it.'' Then the parents faced the rest of their own lives, feeling the need to do something else, something different. They hit upon a cross-country trip, with Bill on his bicycle and Nicki driving a support van, from California to Georgia. Everybody grieves in different ways.
        When he was a child, Bill heard his grandmother describe the raging winds of Oklahoma, in the accent of her native North Carolina. The wind is called the blue norther but Bill thought she was saying ''blue moth.'' The name stayed with him as an adult.
        ''Now, the blue norther of despair -- the blue moth -- struck often,'' Hancock writes in his book, ''Riding with the Blue Moth,'' published in 2005 by Sports Publishing, L.L.C., of Champaign, Ill.
        ''Just as there is little hope in predicting the 10-day forecast, I could not predict when the blue moth might attack, dousing me with a napalm that destroyed all hope,'' Hancock continues. ''I despised the agony that came with those waves of sadness. I hated the savage blue moth.''
        The beast hunkers around his shoulders as he takes a souvenir vial of Pacific water from Huntington Beach, Calif., and heads east. The moth will assault him in the desert, on mountains, in farmland, in towns, while camping at night with Nicki. He learns to live with the monster. He keeps pedaling.His son comes at him from all angles, as a long-haired child, as an adult in a blazer. Out of shape at the start, he feels his son pushing him up a steep Arizona mountain. He thinks of Will's widow and daughter, and Will's brother, Nate. He watches his wife bravely get through each day. As the miles pass, Hancock opens his eyes and heart to the country itself, rediscovering it mile by mile. In a vast nation that has been observed by the likes of Kerouac, Steinbeck, Kuralt, de Tocqueville and Guthrie, Hancock becomes a novice writer, the latest uneasy rider, finding his own vision, his own voice.
        ''The hills of east-central Oklahoma are packed with mighty white oaks and pin oaks,'' he writes. ''I decided every branch was a miniature water cannon spraying humidity into the air, like fire boats in New York City's harbor on the Fourth of July. Three white cows stood up to their armpits in a muddy pool. I wanted to join them.''
        He also observes the people -- the casual violence in word and gesture, the generous offers of beer, soda and water, the Christian construction worker who volunteers that his co-workers are headed straight to hell, the proffered road directions and the drivers who pass him carefully. When whites tell Hancock to steer clear of a certain black town, he seeks it out, finding himself treated with warmth and humor, hardly to his surprise. A red-stater by birth, he is an aging McGovernite flower child by self-image. This land is his land, too.
        Deliberately wearing casual sports gear, self-conscious about appearing like a Tour de France wannabe, Hancock nevertheless appreciates his 27-speed Cannondale R600 with lightweight aluminum frame. He fixes his own flats. He covers 2,746 miles and collects a vial of Atlantic water at Tybee Island, Ga., and then he goes home.
        Since Hancock's book came out last year, he has received this message from readers who have also suffered the ultimate parental nightmare: ''Mr. Hancock, this book has given me hope.''
        Bill and Nicki Hancock spend time with their three grandchildren. He changed jobs, she retired from teaching, and they made another bike trip from Mexico to Canada. (People ask him what it was like to pedal that far uphill, he says with a smile.) The blue moth never goes away, but they keep moving their feet.
        SPORTS OF THE TIMES E-mail: geovec@nytimes.com
      