
        The war is not going as well as some had thought it would. The sectarian strife continues unabated and seems destined to persist. None of the rival parties show much interest in talking to one another to find a way out of the quagmire.
        We are referring, of course, to what some call the war on Christmas, not that other conflict, the one in New York on the Tigris. (Well, why not? If O. Henry could call this city Baghdad on the Hudson, what's wrong with a bit of turnabout?)
        Even using the phrase ''war on Christmas'' can be the verbal equivalent of stepping on a land mine. Many Americans don't believe there is such a thing. To them, it is nothing but a lot of huffing and puffing by founding members of the Church of Perpetual Outrage.
        Be that as it may, others are convinced that a war is on. It was launched, they say, by over-the-top secularists out to strip Christmas of its religious meaning. How do those anti-Christians go about it? By removing Nativity scenes from public schools, by replacing images of Santa Claus with Frosty the Snowman or by wishing people an undifferentiated ''Happy holidays'' instead of ''Merry Christmas.''
        New Yorkers are occasionally drawn into combat. We saw an example two weeks ago when a group in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, put up a tall evergreen and called it a ''holiday tree,'' in the belief that it was being admirably inclusive in a multiethnic neighborhood.
        To a local state senator, Martin J. Golden, there was nothing admirable about it. This is a Christmas tree, for goodness' sake, Mr. Golden said. And Christmas trees, he told a reporter for The Daily News, were ''introduced centuries ago by the Christians.''
        Actually, some historians trace the Christmas tree's roots to pagan cultures. But pagans don't have much of a lobbying machine these days. Besides, the holiday season, if it is O.K. to say ''holiday season,'' may not be an ideal time for splitting theological hairs.
        In the ''Keep Christ in Christmas'' camp, some sense a turning of the tide in their favor. They have not gone so far as to declare ''mission accomplished'' or to sneer that the secularists are bitter-enders in their final throes. But they take heart in the fact that sales clerks who used to say ''Happy holidays'' at some large store chains are now greeting customers with ''Merry Christmas.''
        No doubt, the chains acted with true love and brotherhood, to borrow from ''God Rest Ye Merry, Gentlemen.'' They couldn't have possibly been motivated by a pursuit of the buck and a desire to keep the likes of Bill O'Reilly, a senior deacon in the Church of Perpetual Outrage, off their backs.
        Perhaps a strong reaction to mushy phrases like ''Happy holidays'' was inevitable. And it did not necessarily have anything to do with religion.
        Four Christmases/Hanukkahs/Kwanzaas ago, before the wars began in earnest, I wrote a column that quoted people lamenting the generic blob called ''the holidays.'' To Patricia T. O'Conner, the author of several books about language, ''Happy holidays'' was the ''seasonal version of 'Have a nice day.' ''
        The issue was the mushification of the language. The desire to offend no one led to so much torture of English grammar that human rights groups should have been protesting.
        You see and hear it all the time -- from politicians, bureaucrats, television news readers, you name it. Typical was a poll conducted last year on tax matters. Respondents were asked if they agreed with this statement: ''It is every American's civic duty to pay their fair share of taxes.'' Presumably, that sentence was designed to avoid any whiff of sexism. Deemed irrelevant was its utter illiteracy.
        But what had seemed at the time to be an undermining of the language is now cast by some as no less than a full assault on Christianity.
        It seemed hard to imagine, though, that the woman who waited on me in a Midtown store the other day was being anti-Christian when she said sweetly, ''Enjoy the holidays.''
        Did religious hatred guide an announcement that came crackling over a loudspeaker while I waited for an A train at the 125th Street station? ''Happy holidays from New York City Transit,'' it said. Frankly, it was a delight just to hear an intelligible subway announcement.
        And it somehow got me thinking about our many wars: the war on poverty, the war on drugs, the war on guns and the like. When you consider how they turned out, you have to figure that Christmas doesn't have much to worry about.
        NYC haberman@nytimes.com
      