
        UNDER a dawn sky and the watchful eyes of two stray calico cats, Doug Liman turned out last month for an experience that only a handful of filmmakers had ever known. He was to shoot for three days in the Colosseum.
        No props. No lights. Not even a video cart was permitted to touch the ground. But Mr. Liman, his actors and a small crew from the science fiction thriller ''Jumper'' -- granted unprecedented access even to the amphitheater's labyrinthine guts, where gladiators and doomed beasts once waited -- were to shoot their pivotal love scene on a stage that still belongs more to the dead than the living.
        For the 41-year-old director, a very American two-word expletive was inevitable. ''We have this place to ourselves,'' he continued, as Hayden Christensen, Rachel Bilson and a dozen crew members went to work.
        Mr. Liman's Roman moment was just one stop for an unusually peripatetic film whose locations include Paris, China, Egypt, the Sahara, Toronto, New York, Michigan and Tokyo. Scheduled for release by 20th Century Fox in the spring of 2008, ''Jumper'' is based on the Steven Gould novel about a young man who learns that he has the power of teleportation.
        That his story should land in the middle of quite so difficult a space is a tribute both to the persistence of Mr. Liman's producers and to a new openness on the part of Roman officials, led by Mayor Walter Veltroni, an unabashed cinephile with a soft spot for Hollywood glitz.
        Mayor Veltroni dined with Tom Cruise and Katie Holmes on the eve of their Italian wedding, and was primarily responsible for creating the Rome Film Fest, which took place for the first time in October. On the business front, his administration has streamlined the process for getting filming permits, and authorizes more than 2,000 shoots in the city each year.
        Even so, Rome's bureaucrats remain protective when it comes to the Colosseum, the most imposing of the city's ancient landmarks. Only a few films have had access to the stadium -- even Ridley Scott's ''Gladiator'' settled for a re-creation built in Malta. ''They certainly don't rent it out cavalierly,'' said Lucas Foster, one of the producers of ''Jumper.'' The red tape included months of personal appeals and back-and-forth correspondence about his vision for the film.
        An employee of the Rome Film Commission, who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss the matter, said hundreds of thousands of dollars in fees had changed hands. Mr. Lucas declined to discuss figures. ''It was never about the money,'' he said. ''It came down to respect. And I wouldn't film a sex scene or do something that could embarrass Italy.''
        Yet shooting in the stadium was never essential to the movie. ''The scene was originally written for the Pantheon,'' acknowledged Simon Kinberg, one of the film's writers, as he watched Dave and Millie (the characters played by Mr. Christensen and Ms. Bilson) walk to the southern promontory of the Colosseum's ground level.
        ''The idea to come here was hatched in Doug's apartment in New York about a year ago,'' said Mr. Foster, who reunited with Mr. Liman and Mr. Kinberg on ''Jumper'' after the three collaborated on ''Mr. and Mrs. Smith,'' which was partly shot in Ravello, just hours from Rome. ''We were originally interested in the Pantheon. And we were like, 'Oh my God, can you rent the Pantheon? Can you rent the Colosseum?' ''
        It seems like a silly question coming from Mr. Foster, whose credits include big-budget action fare like ''Man on Fire,'' ''Crimson Tide'' and ''Van Helsing.'' But the interior of the Colosseum -- in its heyday the setting for mock sea battles, animal hunts and countless gladiatorial battles -- had a Holy Grail aura to it.
        ''We are extremely mindful that they opened their doors to us,'' Mr. Liman said during a lunch break on the second day of shooting in Rome; later, the crew would migrate to the Pantheon for some exterior shots. ''I don't want to be the film that shut them down to other people filming. Locations get burned all the time.''
        With access came stipulations. For three days, the crew could work from 6:30 to 8:30 a.m., then for another two hours from 3:30 p.m. until dusk. When time expired, they had to clear out immediately without disturbing the thousands of other daily visitors to the Colosseum. To avoid putting anything on the ground, the sound crew wore harnesses. Lighting was limited to the Mediterranean sun.
        ''It forces you to be superorganized and plan things out in the dark,'' said Mr. Liman, for whom the experience called on the resourcefulness he had learned as the director of low-budget films like ''Swingers.''
        ''It's by far the most stressful environment I've ever filmed in, because you can never go back,'' he added. ''You have to get it right and this is a critical scene in the performance point of view and it flies a little contrary to my style of filmmaking. I like to shoot and reshoot.''
        When they weren't hustling to get their setups inside the Colosseum, the members of the ''Jumper'' crew were dealing with the crowds outside.
        ''Most of the tourists have no idea a movie is being shot, so I do try to take advantage of that, but it's tough,'' Mr. Liman said. ''We have 90 people that work for us as extras, and there are another 300 people out there at any given time who don't work for us, so I am trying to move people.''
        That night, the producers got word from city officials that for the first time they would allow shooting in the subterranean level.
        ''It's hard to describe, but it is up there with one of the cooler things I've ever done,'' said Mr. Christensen, moments after shooting the scene the next day. ''Your imagination goes crazy and you think of all the blood that was shed in this arena. You feel the brick, and it feels historic and there is this sense of wonder.''
        That afternoon, a Friday, the crew was setting up for the last day of interior shots. Max Liebowitz, a 21-year-old classics student from Carleton College in Northfield, Minn., and his friend Jeff Soffer were the last two visitors passing by as they made their way to the exit.
        ''It's bizarre. It certainly takes away from the ancient feel of it,'' Mr. Liebowitz said. ''And to have Rachel Bilson standing over there definitely changes the feel.'' It was unclear if he was complaining.
        On Monday the crew left town, off to the next shoot in Toronto. Days at the Colosseum returned to normal: thousands of visitors streaming in and out to get their own sense of the structure, tourists taking photos of the decaying walls, and, of course, those two calico cats.
        FILM
      