
        To the Editor:
        In his review of Stefan Kanfer's book on the Yiddish theater, ''Stardust Lost'' (Dec. 3), Joseph Dorman takes the author to task for including a reference to a meeting between Mark Twain and the noted Yiddish writer Sholom Aleichem, calling it a ''piece of mythology that never took place.'' Yet in her biography of Aleichem, his daughter Marie Waife-Goldberg documents the meeting as having occurred in 1906, after Aleichem's arrival in the United States. A reception was given for him at the Educational Alliance, attended by such notables as Jacob Schiff, Felix Warburg and Nathan Straus. The daughter reports that it was Justice Samuel Greenbaum who introduced Aleichem to Twain as ''the Jewish Mark Twain.'' Twain graciously replied that on the contrary, he was ''the American Sholom Aleichem.''
        Events that are known with such specificity are hardly likely to lead to the creation of myths.
        Theodore Bikel  West Hollywood, Calif.
        Joseph Dorman replies:
        I'm familiar with Marie Waife-Goldberg's account of such a meeting and appreciate Theodore Bikel's understandable confusion. Her book is a wonderful account of her father's life but it is, unfortunately, neither scholarly nor authoritative. She was not in America in 1906 and so could not have witnessed the event. Her book contains one of several conflicting reports of such an encounter -- all of which, like hers, originate years after the meeting is supposed to have taken place. Neither author ever mentions such a meeting, there are no contemporary accounts of it and no scholar has yet found evidence for it. There were, however, contemporary reports in the American press describing Sholom Aleichem upon his first arrival in America as ''the Jewish Mark Twain'' and these, as Jeffrey Shandler, an associate professor of Jewish studies at Rutgers University, points out, were the likely starting point for this urban legend.
        To the Editor:
        Joseph Dorman's splendid review of ''Stardust Lost'' was both poignant and deeply moving. The Yiddish ''stage,'' as we called it during the late 1940s and early '50s, was an important pastime for immigrant families and their American-born children in Yiddish-speaking homes. Our exposure to the Yiddish theater represented an opportunity to connect with a level of culture we could not obtain through other mediums. Dorman expresses this quite meaningfully and tenderly. Reading his review brought back sensory memories: sitting on my mother's lap in the theater, a very small child, absorbing the palpable interactions between those on the stage and the highly involved audience. The Yiddish theater, an escape for many of us, also served as an entree into the greater world of drama, music, comedy and love for live performance. This marvelous hodgepodge of Yiddish inspiration, zaniness and creativity spawned talented artists who continue to enrich us today -- including Michael Tilson Thomas, the distinguished conductor and grandson of the great Boris Thomashefsky and his wife, Bessie.
        Caryn Bruckheimer  East Brunswick, N.J.
      