
        More than a dozen people have been killed and thousands of goats, camels, donkeys and cows stolen in a brazen cattle raid in northern Kenya, police officials said Friday.
        Livestock rustling is a deadly problem across East Africa, especially in loosely patrolled border areas, and a recent bout of severe drought and heavy rain has cut into available grazing land, exacerbating tensions among ethnic groups competing for survival.
        Rarely, though, has there been a raid like this, according to Kenyan police officials. Hundreds of armed warriors from the West Pokot district in northern Kenya stormed into the village of Lorengipi at dawn on Wednesday. The raiders split into two groups, the police said, with one focused on the terrified villagers while the other rounded up the livestock.
        Among many of Africa's pastoralists, stealing livestock is seen as a badge of honor -- and losing the animals is considered disgraceful. Raiders used to be armed with spears, but now they carry machine guns, which is why more and more people have been killed recently. On Wednesday, villagers tried to resist the raiders, setting off a gun battle that resembled a miniwar, with hundreds of participants.
        ''It's totally wild up there,'' said a Kenyan police spokesman, Gideon M. Kibunjah.
        After killing more than a dozen villagers, the raiders made off with 3,500 camels, 1,700 head of cattle, 700 donkeys and 1,800 goats, according to local news reports. Because the area is so remote, about 200 miles northwest of Nairobi, with little electricity or mobile-phone service, the authorities were not able to respond for hours. Mr. Kibunjah said Friday that information was still coming in from the field and that only six bodies had been recovered, though villagers said 15 to 20 people were killed, with an additional 20 wounded.
        On Friday, Kenyan soldiers, backed by helicopters, were following a huge number of animal tracks leading west, toward Uganda.
        Last summer, more than 70 people were killed in a similar raid on the Kenyan-Ethiopian border. Aid organizations have tried to broker truces between warring tribes, and even Kenyan celebrities like Tegla Loroupe, a world-class marathon runner, have spent their own money on peace programs.
        But it is unclear whether the chiefs in northern Kenya really want to stop the violence.
        As Immanuel Imana, a former minister of Parliament, told Kenyan newspaper Daily Nation, ''The raid was planned with the knowledge of the chiefs. How could 300 people assemble without being noticed?''
      