
        At the midpoint of the 12-day mission of the shuttle Discovery, two astronauts took a complex six-hour spacewalk yesterday to rewire the International Space Station.
        The spacewalkers, Capt. Robert L. Curbeam Jr. of the Navy and Christer Fuglesang of the European Space Agency, completed the tricky electrical work in just two hours and moved on to more mundane tasks before ending the spacewalk at 7:41 p.m., an hour ahead of schedule. They completed the first half of the rewiring, with a second spacewalk planned for Saturday to finish the job.
        For the past six years, the station has been running on a temporary configuration of its power system, drawing electricity from an array of solar panels atop the station. The rewiring will bring the station to its permanent arrangement, drawing power from a new array that rotates to face the sun during orbit. That array was carried to the station on the shuttle Atlantis's flight in September; more arrays may be added later.
        The work involved a fair amount of unplugging and plugging cables in the harsh environment of space. The power cables the astronauts handled were not live; half the power network was turned off for each spacewalk. Mission managers spent much of the morning turning off equipment that was not essential -- including half the lights in the orbiting laboratory -- so critical equipment could remain in operation, receiving power from the other half of the network.
        By 4:45 p.m., the rewiring was complete and Stephen Robinson, an astronaut at mission control who communicates with the crew in orbit, radioed with what he called ''good news from Houston.'' And then he corrected himself: ''It's not good news, it's great news.''
        The components of the power system that had been connected were functioning properly, and none of the equipment would need to be replaced.
        ''Ex-cellent,'' Captain Curbeam responded, stretching the word with pleasure.
        The spacewalk, which included a moment of awed appreciation of the northern lights seen from above, came after a frustrating day on Wednesday, as astronauts tried to get the old solar array to fold back into its storage box to provide clearance for the new array to rotate.
        The old array, which has been open for six years, stubbornly refused to retract all the way, developing kinks and jams as Cmdr. Sunita L. Williams of the Navy ran the motorized unit to retract it with more than 50 stop-and-start operations. Commander Williams was able to get the array retracted by 40 percent of its length, which was enough to allow the new array free movement, so mission managers decided to move on to yesterday's spacewalk and try to fully retract the array later.
        Mission managers, who have been discussing options since Wednesday night, appear to be leaning toward adding a spacewalk before the end of this mission to try to coax the solar array panels back into their container by hand.
        Earlier yesterday, as Captain Curbeam and Mr. Fuglesang prepared for their spacewalk, the video feed on NASA TV showed the shuttle team floating around the cabin, reveling in weightlessness as they performed their tasks. But the spacewalk itself was conducted without the usual live video for much of the spacewalk, because the site was too close to the antenna required for video transmission, and mission managers did not want to expose Captain Curbeam and Mr. Fuglesang to additional electromagnetic radiation from the antenna.
        Radiation from the sun has also been a concern on this mission. A solar flare on Wednesday caused what the National Weather Service Space Environment Center called a ''moderate solar radiation storm.'' The storm has affected some radio transmissions on Earth, and has led mission managers to order the shuttle and station crews to sleep in protected areas of their craft, where there is more shielding from radiation.
        With the rewiring complete, mission controllers turned on the cooling system so the power grid equipment would not overheat. If a problem had developed with the pumps that circulate cooling ammonia through the power network, managers would have had to order the two spacewalkers to undo all of their previous electrical work and return to the old configuration until the pump problem could be resolved -- potentially in an additional spacewalk to replace one of the 1,500-pound pumps.
        But by 5:19 p.m., Mr. Robinson let the astronauts know that the pump, which had been on the station for four years without being used, kicked on without trouble.
        ''Excellent,'' Captain Curbeam said again.
      