
        A fierce storm that raked across the Pacific Northwest on Thursday night and Friday morning knocked out power to more than a million households and businesses, including half of the city of Seattle. At least four people were dead, and there were no promises that power would be fully restored soon.
        The storm, which brought heavy rain to Seattle and its suburbs and blizzard conditions in the mountains, shot wind gusts of up to 113 miles per hour through the Cascade Range and 69 m.p.h., a record, at the Seattle-Tacoma International Airport. It rumbled rooftops like a hurricane in many elevated areas. Trees fell on houses, schools closed, a major bridge across Lake Washington was temporarily shut down and acontinuing search for three climbers lost for nearly a week on Mount Hood in Oregon was delayed.
        The storm, generated by air rushing in behind a big low-pressure system that formed in the Pacific Ocean, followed a November that saw severe flooding from record rainfall, then record cold and then unexpected snow and ice. It seemed an exasperating highlight reel of extreme weather for many who lived through it.
        ''It's been nuts,'' said Alan Johnson, store director for the Quality Food Center in Seattle's Wallingford neighborhood, where customers shopped in silhouette under the limited light provided by a generator.
        With power minimal and coolers not cooling, Mr. Johnson directed workers to take boxes of boneless chicken breasts and other perishables ''to a store where they can keep it cold.''
        Flights were delayed all day Friday at the Seattle-Tacoma airport, where a power disruption in the south terminal shut down the baggage system much of the morning. The Evergreen Point Floating Bridge, a main commuter route between Seattle and its suburbs east of Lake Washington, was closed for several hours after waves damaged the drawbridge.
        The Seattle Times said it published only about 13,000 print copies of the newspaper because power was lost overnight at its plant in Bothell, north of Seattle. The newspaper reported that four people died in the storm, including one woman who became trapped in her flooded basement on Thursday night.
        The wind and debris knocked out 64 major electrical feeder lines overnight in Seattle, compared with just one or two that were damaged in storms last month, said Peter Clarke, a spokesman for Seattle City Light, the main electrical utility. Two hospitals operated under generator power on Friday. Downtown Seattle, which has an underground grid, did not lose power.
        Puget Sound Energy, which supplies power to many of Seattle's suburbs, said about 700,000 of the utility's one million customers lost power.
        ''Our system was really hit, probably harder than it ever has been,'' said Martha Monfried, a spokeswoman for the utility. She said it could be ''days'' before power was restored to some areas.
        In Oregon, Sergeant Gerry Tiffany, a spokesman for the Hood River County Sheriff's Office, said high winds and heavy snow had slowed the search for three men missing on Mount Hood since Sunday.
        With skies clearing, he said mountain rescue teams planned a major push to the 11,249-foot summit on Saturday. At the Wallingford Station post office in Seattle, power was short, transactions were limited to cash and lines were long. Customers nonetheless waited in relatively good humor to mail holiday gifts and conduct other business. One of them, Dean Custis, 62, a jovial man of substantial circumference, said he was awake until at least 3:30 a.m. on Friday watching the winds rip through his neighborhood in North Seattle, Licton Springs.
        ''The top of my hot tub blew off,'' he said. ''So I just went out and sat in it.''
      