
        Last spring, while walking in a remote stretch of woods and looking for blooming lady's slipper orchids in my hometown, Easton, Conn., I met Larry Fischer. He is a volunteer for the United States Department of the Interior who traps, tags and releases raptors. He has been doing it for 25 years, nearly half his life.
        The silver metal bands that he puts on the birds -- a different tag for each species -- have a serial number, and can be used later, if the hawk is trapped again or found dead, to access the information that Fischer has collected on that bird. With such information, the habits, health and migration of a particular species can be cobbled together.
        ''They say passerine banders are weird, and hawk banders are even weirder,'' Fischer said. ''Owl banders are the weirdest. I band hawks and owls, so I guess that makes me eccentric.''
        A strong, broad-shouldered man with a mustache and a slight resemblance to Chuck Norris, Fischer, 56, was combing a stand of white pines looking for nests of sharp-shinned hawks when I encountered him. Before the juvenile hawks of several species had left their nests, Fischer climbed the trees -- sometimes as high as 80 feet -- with specialized tree-climbing gear, to put the metal tags on the hawks' legs.
        The next day, from the vantage of a high ledge, I watched him climb 61 feet up an oak tree to put a tag on a young red-tailed hawk. As he teetered on one foot, reaching over his head into the nest for a bird he could not even see, I thought, this man is beyond eccentric.
        That was Fischer's spring work; he makes his living as a carpenter. In the fall, he trapped adult raptors using live lure birds as bait. ''It's kind of like fishing for hawks,'' he said.
        In September, as the orchard grasses were yellowing, the ragweed and goldenrod were in full bloom, and the silky parachutes carrying milkweed seeds were aloft with migrating monarchs, I stepped into Fischer's hawk-trapping blind. From the blind on a high hill, we had a good view of lower Fairfield County and could see across the Sound to Long Island.
        Fischer said that this abandoned orchard, an open field about two miles in circumference, was perhaps the most significant foraging stopover point for migrating raptors in New England.
        ''They leave the corridor to come here,'' he said, to fuel up on voles, crickets and songbirds for the long journey south. Some of the raptors, like the broad-winged hawks that swarmed above us in flocks of hundreds, migrate as far as Central and South America.
        From the blind -- basically a plywood box that concealed us from the hawks -- Fischer operated the traps and the live lure birds like a puppeteer.
        From the blind to three cedar poles, two lines run on a pulley system so Fischer can raise and lower the bait, like a flag, into the air to entice a hawk flying by. A third line to the blind operates a pin that springs the trap.
        The left pole is baited with a house sparrow, the middle with a starling and the right with a pigeon, each for different-sized raptors. Each lure bird is fitted with a leather harness to protect its vital organs from an attacking hawk. Below each lure bird is a ring of steel with netting and springs. When the line is pulled from inside the blind, a semicircle of steel comes over the top of the bird, covering it with netting.
        During the season, September through November, Fischer spends at least two days a week in the blind, from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., totaling more than 100 hours. Knowledgeable as he is, given his field experience, Fischer said he was constantly humbled by the birds he observed.
        ''It takes five years until you know how to study a hawk, and after 10 years, you realize everything you thought you knew was wrong,'' he said.
        Fischer said he liked time alone and only occasionally wanted company in the blind. When he was younger, he sailed on merchant ships. ''I liked the quiet out on the sea,'' he said.
        Fischer is calm and contemplative, even reticent, but when the first hawk of the day came down, a northern harrier, he lost his composure. His hands were shaking as the hawk made for the starling. With the bait firmly in the hawk's talons, Fischer dragged it over the center of the trap, but when he pulled the line that springs the trap, nothing happened. He jumped out of the blind to scare the harrier away.
        ''I forgot to set the pin in the trap,'' he said, laughing. ''I had to get that hawk off the starling before he killed it. Usually, I spring the trap and they let go of the lure bird.''
        Even though Fischer exposed the lure birds to peril, he was protective of them, especially his pigeons Flash, Dash, Mrs. Mr., Mr. Mr. and Eclipse. Sometimes the lure birds are wounded, but he carefully stitches them or seals the wound with glue, then retires them for the season so they can heal.
        Although he likes the rare chance to catch an eagle, it usually means the end of his lure bird.
        ''When an eagle comes in, it makes the trap a shambles,'' Fischer said. ''When they hit the pigeon, well. ... ''
        Perfect migration weather is a ''northwest wind on an approaching high,'' Fischer said, because the southward traveling birds like to fly, ''across the breeze.''
        One day this fall, he had those conditions.
        Fischer was up in the orchard, sitting alone in the blind eating a sandwich after a morning of inactivity. Midbite, looking out of the blind, he saw a harrier, a medium-sized hawk, land on the pigeon Mrs. Mr.
        Fischer quickly picked up the line and started to drag the harrier over the net, but the harrier did not want to budge.
        ''I was about to spring the trap, when all of a sudden the harrier takes off, and out of nowhere, a golden eagle lands on top of the trap to pirate the prey and perfectly tips down his head, and I spring the trap,'' Fischer said.
        It was the first eagle he ever trapped. In 45 years of trapping, Fischer's mentor, Jerry Mesereau, never captured an eagle. Fischer said that the eagle's feet were as big as his hands.
        ''Right after I released the eagle, I got a red-tail hawk,'' he said. ''What a small bird it was in comparison.''
        The pigeon that brought down the eagle, Mrs. Mr., was wounded, but O.K. Fisher did not lose a lure bird all season.
        OUTDOORS
      