
        To the Editor:
        Re ''President Wants to Increase Size of Armed Forces'' (front page, Dec. 20):
        President Bush wants more bodies for the armed forces of the United States. How can this be done without reinstituting the draft?
        I don't know of anyone who would encourage a family member to join the military so long as this administration is steering the mess in Iraq into even deeper trouble.
        Dave Walker  North Dartmouth, Mass.  Dec. 20, 2006
        To the Editor:
        On Tuesday, the president quoted Gen. Peter Pace, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as saying of the war in Iraq: ''We're not winning. We're not losing.''
        I thought one of the principal ''lessons of Vietnam'' was that no president wants to lose a war and will go to extraordinary lengths to keep a losing battle going just to avoid the appearance of defeat.
        President Lyndon B. Johnson knew that the war was a loser yet kept sending more troops. Richard M. Nixon was elected, taking over a war that others had started and escalated, yet refused to bring it to an end -- into his second term -- for the same reason, not to be seen as a loser.
        The history of warfare shows that great leaders know when to retreat.
        Charles  Steiner Jr.  Jersey City, Dec. 20, 2006
        To the Editor:
        President Bush is asking for an increase in our armed forces. Is this a euphemism for creating a perpetual presence of United States might around the world?
        How ironic, even though the United States is the only unmatched military power; no other country is threatening our democratic institutions, as was the case after World War II.
        We have dug ourselves a graveyard in increasing the armed forces at the level of enlisted men and women to satisfy the needs of an evangelical self-righteous politician in a quest of spreading democracy by the gun.
        Brahama  D. Sharma  Pismo Beach, Calif., Dec. 20, 2006
        To the Editor:
        History will be clear and simple about the Iraq war: President Bush inserted American troops between hostile Shiites and Sunnis in Iraq, and when the Shiites and Sunnis went to war against each other, President Bush refused to pull out the Americans.
        James G. Roberts  Oakland, Calif., Dec. 20, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Has it occurred to anyone that a better way to spend some of the money we are spending on our military would be to hire young unemployed men in Iraq to rebuild their own country?
        Over and over, I read that unemployment in Iraq feeds the insurgency. Young men need something constructive to do with their time to keep them out of trouble.
        The Works Progress Administration worked in this country to relieve the hardship of the Depression. Why wouldn't it work in Iraq?
        Beverly Kaiser  South Yarmouth, Mass.  Dec. 20, 2006
        To the Editor:
        In ''New Iraq Strategy Emerges: First Security, Then Politics'' (military analysis, Dec. 20), you write, President Bush has ''taken one step that is a prerequisite for any effort to sustain expanded military operations in Iraq: he has signaled his intention to increase the size of the American armed forces.''
        In fact, any expansion of the American armed forces is irrelevant to the outcome in Iraq. Recruiting such troops is already nearly impossible; Army recruiters have already significantly lowered their standards and their recruitment goals to keep up the size of today's Army.
        Training the new recruits and exercising them properly would take upward of two years, making them available long after they would be useful in Iraq.
        The answer in Iraq is not more troops but less. The answer to the Army's dilemma is to begin the withdrawal from Iraq now.
        Gordon Adams  Silver Spring, Md., Dec. 20, 2006
        The writer is a fellow at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars.
        To the Editor:
        Re ''New Iraq Strategy Emerges: Security, Then Politics'':
        There once was a hulking giant going peacefully about his business. One day he is attacked by bees. The brute can't swat the bees fast enough, so in frustration he attacks his neighbor, who had nothing to do with the bees.
        The neighbor, angered by this injustice, fights back as best he can against the brute strength of the giant. The situation spirals out of control.
        The United States in Iraq is like that giant. Do you think that President Bush will ever learn that the Army is not the correct tool for fighting terrorism? Sending more troops to Iraq will just arouse more bees.
        Bob Stayton  Santa Cruz, Calif., Dec. 20, 2006
      