
        How Language Works  How Babies Babble, Words Change Meaning, and Languages Live or Die  By David Crystal  500 pages. The Overlook Press. $32.50.
        When I first began reading David Crystal's ''How Language Works,'' I was a bit perplexed. It seemed to be moving too fast and too abruptly through topics and sub-topics. There were no transitions and no chatty digressions. It was like being in the back seat of a taxi whose driver had his foot to the floor.
        Then I got it. What Mr. Crystal, widely regarded as a leading authority on linguistics, has done is to assume the role of a master distiller of knowledge who takes the whole subject of language and pours it into 73 clearly labeled bottles all beginning with the word ''How'' -- as in, ''How we use tone of voice,'' ''How children learn to mean,'' ''How conversation works.''
        This is not a book meant to be read as a narrative. The author himself advises that this book should not necessarily be read ''from left to right.'' He compares it to a car manual in which the section on tires can be read independently from the one on lights. The book takes us through the intricacies of spoken, written and signed language. He covers topics like lexicography, grammar, comparative linguistics, with meaty sections on dialects, dyslexia, discourse, multilingualism and more.
        He succeeds again and again with clarity, wit and enthusiasm. Mr. Crystal, who is British, is that rare academic linguist who can discuss language authoritatively without resorting to the polysyllabic jargon that often serves as a wall around that realm of scholarship.
        Have you ever wondered: ''How languages are born''? This chapter is a fine example of how he deftly explains an arcane topic. The chapter concentrates on ''contact languages,'' those that spring up when two cultures come in contact and need a quick common language, often for reasons of commerce. As he points out, these are known as pidgins, and when a pidgin becomes the preferred language for a community, it becomes a creole.
        The established view has been that these languages evolve independently and each is unique, whether they are based on English or Danish. But Mr. Crystal says that modern research strongly suggests that all these languages derive from a 15th-century Portuguese pidgin. As the Portuguese explored Asia, Africa and the Americas, this prototypical pidgin spread, and the syntax remained in place as words changed to adapt to other languages. But there is still evidence of that old Portuguese pidgin. In English-based pidgins and creoles, for example, a few Portuguese words remain, like ''savi'' for know and ''palava'' for trouble.
        Another topic Mr. Crystal handles adroitly is sign language. After laying out all the conventional wisdom on sign language (that is, it is no more than a system of sophisticated gesturing and not a real language at all; that there is just one sign language) he declares all of it wrong. He says that sign languages are real languages and that they develop independently as languages even within the same speaking group. British Sign Language and American Sign Language are not mutually intelligible. When ''Children of a Lesser God,'' Mark Medoff's play about deafness, was first shown in London, the actors used American Sign Language, and users of the British version had to have the signs interpreted.
        Time and again a point is made and illustrated with a fact or anecdote that perfectly drives it home. For example he tells us that every language spoken evolved from the large assortment of sound units of which the human voice is capable, but that no language uses all the sound units available to it. His evidence is that English has (in some accents) 44 sound units, Rotokas in the Pacific Islands has only 11 but !Xu in Southern Africa emits 141 different sound units when spoken.
        Or, in his discussion of hesitation and emphasis in printed words, he shows how the repeating of letters for effect can lead to ambiguity, especially in translation from one language to another. In Alexander Solzhenitsyn's ''Cancer Ward,'' a character says ''No-o.'' In the original Russian version this repeating of the ''o'' would convey ''an emphatic negative'' while in English it is more a signal for hesitation.
        If there is a quibble to be made it is that Mr. Crystal occasionally seems to exceed his own speed limit and discuss key issues too quickly. The question asked by anxious parents every day about which is the better way to teach a child to read -- phonics or whole-word approaches -- is addressed in a couple of paragraphs, noting that this debate has raged since the early 19th century. Then there is his balanced but all-too-brief presentation of the centuries-old battle between the advocates of prescribing grammar and usage versus those who simply describe what is actually being spoken and written. Again, this is something he moves through as quickly as one can turn impact from a noun to a verb.
        But it is a marvelous ride.
        BOOKS OF THE TIMES Paul Dickson, the author of more than 45 nonfiction books including ''Slang: The Topical Dictionary of Americanisms,'' writes frequently about language, baseball and 20th-century American history.
      