
        The optometrist and I were having the bald conversation. He was taller than I and a little younger, but his remaining hair looked just the same as mine: as if it had been stippled onto his head with a sponge.
        ''You trim it yourself?'' he asked while flipping the lenses up and down on the Phoroptor.
        ''Yeah,'' I said, nodding sagely. ''I bought a $10 set of clippers at Sears.''
        ''What setting?'' he asked.
        ''I started at No. 2.'' He looked at me admiringly. I decided, What the hell, let's impress him. ''But then I went down to No. 1.'' A No. 1 setting on hair clippers is dangerously close to shaving your head. Like many short white guys, I'm afraid to actually shave my head, because if I did I would look like either a cancer patient or the actor Michael Chiklis.
        ''I'm at No. 2, now,'' the optometrist said, ''but I'm considering going shorter. Who does the back of your neck?''
        ''My wife,'' I said.
        ''I do it myself,'' he said, his eyes downcast. ''It's hard.'' We both considered the vision before us: a lonely bachelor, leaning over the same kitchen sink where he eats his meals of Diet Mountain Dew and Vienna sausages, trying to shave a straight line across the back of his own neck via an apparatus of mirrors.
        ''You know,'' I said, trying to be encouraging, ''there's never been a better moment to be bald than right now. Consider Ed Harris. Sean Connery.''
        The optometrist considered this. ''Come on, let's go pick out some glasses.''
        In the showroom, he walked directly to a particular set of frames. ''Here,'' he said, ''try these.''
        Quick, what does the architect Daniel Libeskind look like? You don't know, do you? Because every time you've seen a picture of him, you've been distracted by his enormous, black, rectangular glasses, which look as if they should be sold in novelty shops and come with little electric windshield wipers. The optometrist now handed those glasses to me. I put them on.
        ''They look great,'' he said.
        I peered into the mirror. ''I look like a raccoon,'' I said.
        ''You can pull them off,'' he said. ''I couldn't, but you can.''
        There was a clerk standing nearby wearing a nameplate that said ''Lolita.'' I invited her opinion.
        Lolita looked at me as if I had a View-Master duct-taped to my face. ''I don't know,'' she said, unwilling to contradict the optometrist. Franchise eyeglass shops are tribal places with a savage hierarchy imposed by shaming.
        I turned to a nearby customer, a 50-ish woman with permed hair, wearing an elaborate necklace: ''How about you? What do you think of these glasses?''
        She stared at me. ''I think you look wonderful. Are you single?''
        ''Um, no, but my wife isn't here, so I'm trying to gather some opinions.''
        ''Maybe try these,'' Lolita said as she handed me a pair a little less like a welder's mask.
        ''I think I like these better,'' I said.
        The optometrist insisted: ''No, honestly. You should really go with the other pair.'' Then, finally noticing the line of restless patients stumbling into the walls of the waiting room, he retreated back to the exam area.
        I seized the chance and turned to Lolita: ''I think I'll take the ones you picked out.''
        As I paid for my glasses, the lady with the permed hair approached and asked me, ''Do you know any single men about your age?''
        I thought about it. ''I do, but the ones I know tend to date women in their 20s.''
        ''I know!'' she cried. ''That's so unfair!'' She put down the fake-ruby-encrusted frames she had picked out and asked a salesclerk for ''something younger.''
        The optometrist came back from the exam room. ''What did you decide on?'' he asked.
        ''I got the other pair,'' I said.
        ''It's not too late,'' he said.
        ''They're already making up the other pair,'' I said.
        ''Who cares?'' he said with the air of a man fully prepared to hurl a brand-new pair of eyeglasses into a roaring fire in a mad gesture of passion. ''Come on, try them on again.''
        ''Wait a minute,'' I said. ''You don't want me to have these glasses. You want these glasses. And you know what? You can have them. Go ahead. You can do it.''
        ''I just don't think I can get away with it,'' he said.
        ''You're an optometrist,'' I said. ''You can get away with anything. Try them on.''
        He did, reluctantly. He looked like a bald raccoon. But tall.
        ''You look great,'' I said. ''Bold. Brave. Confident. Remember -- Ed Harris, Bruce Willis. This is our time.''
        He seemed uncertain. Meanwhile, the lady with the permed hair was looking at him with a new sense of wonder and discovery. The eyeglass store was momentarily gravid with human possibility.
        Then he took the glasses off, as if afraid of being caught with them. The lady went back to nervously checking the shelves, perhaps worried that younger people had given up glasses altogether and had taken up monocles.
        I would like to go back to the store to see if he ever worked up the courage to buy the glasses. But I can't just yet. There's a 30-day return period on my glasses, and I don't want him to get any ideas.
        THE FUNNY PAGES: II: TRUE-LIFE TALES Peter Sagal is the host of NPR's ''Wait, Wait . . . Don't Tell Me!'' His last True-Life Tale was about a trip to the ballpark with his wife.
      