
        Beware the roads of Maine from 10 to 11 o'clock on a June night. That is the hour when man meets moose.
        A new study reports that this is the time when most cars collide with moose in a state that has the most moose in the country. The researchers found that though moose were involved in 15 percent of 22,000 collisions with animals over a five-year period, they caused most of the deaths and more than half the injuries.
        Small wonder, considering the bulk of the largest member of the deer family.
        According to the study, by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, moose can reach more than seven feet at the shoulder and weigh 1,600 pounds. They are usually struck in the legs, and that can send them rolling over the hood, where they collapse the windshield and roof.
        In all, over the five years, accidents between moose and vehicles led to 800 injuries and 14 deaths. Most occurred at night from May to October, when the weather warms and the moose become more active and mate.
        The accidents were more common on roads where the speed limits were 40 miles an hour or faster. The study also noted that few Maine roads are lighted, making it harder to see roadside animals.
        Maine, with an estimated 29,000 moose, has programs to educate drivers about avoiding animal collisions. The study suggested improving them, and it said removing roadside vegetation might help.
        VITAL SIGNS: FOR THE RECORD
        Correction:  December 19, 2006, Tuesday  A brief report in the Vital Signs column in Science Times last Tuesday about a study finding that a drug for hair loss appears to lower P.S.A., an indicator of prostate cancer, misidentified the drug. It is Propecia, not Proscar. (The active ingredient in both drugs is finasteride; Propecia offers a much lower dose than Proscar, which is used to treat enlarged prostate glands.)
        Another report in the Vital Signs column about a study of collisions between cars and moose misstated a ranking for Maine, where the study was done. It has the most moose in the continental United States, not the country. (Alaska is first.)
      