
        The title isn't much, but the premise is clever.
        In ''My Bare Lady,'' a new four-part reality mini-series (the second episode is on Fox Reality tonight), four American pornographic-film actresses are whisked to London and given three weeks of classical theater training. Their goal is to leave X-rated movies behind and move into mainstream acting.
        The show's goal, it seems, mainly is to titillate, but it may demonstrate other assets as the four finalists work toward London debuts. At least most of them seem sincere about their desire to learn and change.
        Kirsten Price, 24, is originally from Massachusetts and travels with pink luggage. Nautica Thorn, 22, from Hawaii, has the most exotic look. Chanel St. James, 34, is from Arizona and has the most attention-getting breasts. Sasha Knox, 22, from California, stands out because of her fresh, natural look. But she's definitely one of the girls.
        ''I don't party, but I do love sex,'' Ms. Knox tells the camera. She also announces, ''I really am a great actress.''
        That may be true. The finalists showed hints of real dramatic ability in the first episode. But the hour focused mostly on prurience or, as Hamlet would say, country matters.
        The herd of actresses who auditioned in Los Angeles were instructed to fake orgasms on camera. For no good reason the casting people also asked them for the titles of some movies in which they had appeared. ''The More the Merrier'' and ''18 and Easy'' are among the more printable.
        Then it was time to ridicule their ignorance. One actress said she had never heard of the play she was being asked to read: ''Romeo and Juliet.'' A couple were puzzled by the name Montague in the script. One thought the word might be monologue; another asked if it was supposed to be montage.
        And even though it was explained to them, few seemed to grasp that in the line ''Wherefore art thou Romeo?'' the first word referred to cause rather than physical location.
        Somewhere in the reality-series code it is written that the losers must be shown, embarrassed and hurt as they are rejected by the judges. ''My Bare Lady'' is no exception. Most of the rejected are philosophical, reasoning that there is always another audition around the corner. Sunny Lane, Gia Darling and Sunset Thomas are among those who don't make the finals.
        In tonight's episode the finalists are settling into their London flat (yes, they share bedrooms, to encourage roommate conflict) and beginning their training, which includes voice and dance lessons as well as brushing up on their Shakespeare.
        If ''My Bare Lady'' can restrain itself from adolescent smirking, it may be fascinating. But the odds are against that.
        My Bare Lady
        Fox Reality, tonight at 8; Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time.
        A co-production of Fox Reality and Zig Zag Productions.
        TELEVISION REVIEW
      