
        Eleven days and many millions of dollars to go before the fate of ''The Gross Clinic'' is decided. Will this Thomas Eakins masterpiece stay in Philadelphia?
        The seconds have been ticking by since Nov. 10, when Thomas Jefferson University, which owns this 1875 painting, gave local institutions until Dec. 26 to match a $68 million offer. If they don't, the canvas will head for points south -- specifically, the National Gallery of Art in Washington and the brand-new Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art in Bentonville, Ark., founded by the Wal-Mart heiress Alice L. Walton.
        The canvas, an 1878 gift from alumni who bought it for $200, depicts a revered Jefferson University professor, Dr. Samuel D. Gross, holding a scalpel in the vast amphitheater of the Jefferson Medical College as he removes a piece of dead bone from a patient's thigh. It is widely considered one of the most important works of American art; equally important for Philadelphia, Eakins is a native son.
        Within an hour after hearing about the proposed sale, Anne d'Harnoncourt, director of the Philadelphia Museum of Art, announced that her museum, together with the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts and other local institutions, would do everything possible to match the offer.
        ''This is a wild moment,'' Ms. d'Harnoncourt said this week. ''There has never been anything like this.''
        Although she would not specify how much money the city had raised, she did say the figure was ''substantially above'' the $23 million in pledges she had received by Nov. 29.
        ''We've had 1,600 gifts from 30 states,'' she said. ''This is about saving a Philadelphia icon.''
        Asked whether the Philadelphia Museum would sell any of its own works to finance the purchase, she declined to comment.
        Not everyone is so passionate about keeping the painting in Philadelphia. Some local residents characterize the city's campaign as parochial hysteria. They note that Philadelphia institutions already have more than 75 percent of Eakins's known works and that the canvas will be seen by millions of people if it is shared between Washington and Arkansas. (Only 500 people a year go to see it at Jefferson, where it has hung since 1878.)
        ''I'm happy to see people passionate about something,'' said Phil Goldsmith, a former chief financial officer for the City of Philadelphia. ''But this takes me by surprise. I'm passionate about the increasing homicide rate in the city and the number of homeless people I see on the streets, but it never entered my mind that 'The Gross Clinic' is so important.''
        That it might go to the fledgling Arkansas museum also seems to irk some Philadelphians. ''I wouldn't call it snobbishness as much as an inferiority complex,'' Mr. Goldsmith said. ''People keep saying, 'How can this be sent to the Ozarks?,' meaning Arkansas.''
        ''We should be proud to see one of our treasures in other places, even if it is Arkansas,'' he added. ''We seem to forget we had a president from Arkansas that a lot of people here liked. The least we can do is share with them.''
        Sharing the painting between two museums would serve two great traditions, argued John Wilmerding, a professor of art history at Princeton and a National Gallery trustee who advised Ms. Walton on the purchase. ''On one hand, the painting is seen in the context of a great national museum of American art,'' he said. ''And on the other, supporting a public museum out there in Middle America itself is the most democratic thing you can think of.''
        The proposed sale ''is a win-win situation whatever happens,'' he said. ''I just think 'The Gross Clinic' is a more national than local painting.''
        Still, pointing out that Eakins lived, studied and worked in Philadelphia, local politicians have rushed to the barricades. Mayor John Street proposed last month that the painting be designated a ''historic object'' under the city's historic preservation ordinance. That designation would put ''The Gross Clinic'' under the jurisdiction of the Philadelphia Historical Commission and could prevent its removal from the city.
        It might also mean that if Philadelphia is unable to raise the money, the sale to the National Gallery and Crystal Bridges could be tied up in court for years.
        Jefferson University officials, who have said they are selling the painting to raise money needed for school buildings and for clinical research and education, responded to the mayor's proposal in a terse statement calling it ''not appropriate'' and ''inconsistent with applicable law.'' The university asserted that it would mandate an ''artificially low sale price''for the work and ''restrict the university's control over its own property.'' It also pointed out that it had invited local institutions to match the $68 million offer, not outbid it.
        Perhaps wary of fanning the flames, the university declined to comment this week on the mayor's efforts. So did Earl A. Powell III, director of the National Gallery, and Robert G. Workman, director of Crystal Bridges.
        Some people expressed surprise that Jefferson University would part with the painting. Nancy Herman, who heads the Friends of the Barnes Foundation, a local organization trying to prevent that art institution from moving to Philadelphia from its historic home in Merion, said she considered ''all the hoopla over the painting'' to be ''media created.'' Nonetheless, as the wife and mother-in-law of Jefferson graduates, she wonders ''why the school, after valuing the painting so much that they created a gallery for it, has decided its value is now only monetary.''
        In contrast, Marie Naples Maber, an art teacher in New Jersey who attended school in Philadelphia, said, ''I find it interesting that Philadelphia feels it has the right to tell Jefferson what they should do with their own property.'' Referring to Thomas Eakins and Samuel Gross, she added, ''They were great Americans, not just great Philadelphians.''
        When it comes to Eakins's teaching career, few people remember that he was fired twice from Philadelphia schools, most notoriously from the Pennsylvania Academy in 1885, when he removed a loincloth from a male model in a class attended by both male and female students. So incensed were parents and trustees that he was forced to resign.
        Mr. Wilmerding impishly suggested that in invoking Eakins's importance to Philadelphia history, residents seem to have overlooked another small detail: ''The Gross Clinic'' was rejected as a work of art when it was entered in the Centennial Exhibition in Philadelphia in 1879. Instead, it was relegated to a display of medical equipment.
        Inside Art
      