
        Several songs into his sold-out concert at the Bowery Ballroom on Tuesday night, Sean Lennon let his temper flare. It happened after someone in the audience tossed a clunky object onstage -- some kind of offering apparently made of aluminum, with ill-advised sharp corners -- and it sailed perilously close to the head of Yuka Honda, Mr. Lennon's keyboardist and ex-girlfriend.
        ''Who threw that?'' Mr. Lennon demanded. A hand was raised, an apology was mumbled, and the show went on. But not before a stern admonishment from Mr. Lennon, whose irritation was more than justified; as the son of John Lennon and Yoko Ono, he knows a thing or two about intrusive behavior. (He made no mention of the recent news of alleged death threats by his mother's former driver. He didn't need to.)
        It says something about Mr. Lennon that he moved on quickly, disarming the tension with wryness. The next song in the set would be ''Dead Meat,'' he said. Then, pointing toward the chastised fan, with a slight smile: ''It's dedicated to this guy.''
        The people in the crowd laughed gratefully, though most of them probably knew the real provenance of the tune. ''Dead Meat'' is the opening track on ''Friendly Fire'' (Capitol), Mr. Lennon's first solo album in eight years. And like most everything on the album, it's a bittersweet meditation on love and loss inspired by recent events in Mr. Lennon's life: chiefly, the end of his relationship with Bijou Phillips, another famous product of rock 'n' roll parentage, and the death of Max LeRoy, his lifelong friend.
        It gets more complicated of course. There had been a secret affair between Ms. Phillips and Mr. LeRoy, and Mr. Lennon had not reconciled with his friend before the motorcycle accident that claimed his life last year. So there's guilt and anguish as well as resentment in a lyric like ''you're going to get what you deserve,'' which Mr. Lennon sings in the incongruously sweet chorus of ''Dead Meat.'' The same sentiments suffuse the album's connotative title track, which has another accusation (''You launched the assault, with the first cannonball'') that Mr. Lennon could have leveled against his out-of-line fan.
        But if ''Friendly Fire'' is an act of public therapy -- the album comes with an elaborate suite of music videos directed by Michele Civetta, featuring a stylish cast that pointedly includes Ms. Phillips -- Mr. Lennon appears to have made a sort of peace with himself. On Tuesday he sounded extravagantly comfortable with the mopey grandeur of his songs, and with the expressive potential of his thin but somehow appealing voice. Like some of the cannier operators in pop music, he made feeling bad feel good.
        You could easily identify precedents for Mr. Lennon's sound: Brian Wilson, surely, and Elliott Smith. The sly surrealism of ''Headlights'' suggested Beck; elsewhere there were shades of Jon Brion. Of course it all pointed back to his father's band, the Beatles -- sometimes brazenly, as on ''Wait for Me'' and ''Spectacle'' -- and there was nothing to do but savor the evocation.
        After all, Mr. Lennon has as much of a right to that legacy as anyone, and his five-piece band expertly carried the music into a hazy space of its own. On one of the best performances of the night, ''Falling Out of Love,'' Mr. Lennon's voice formed a clean chromatic line against a storm of sound. His father's echo was there, but it was the least conflicted thing about him.
        Sean Lennon will perform tomorrow at Ram's Head Live! in Baltimore.
        MUSIC REVIEW
      