
        WHEN one of his competitors raises his ''for sale'' posters higher or another yells, ''Papers!'' louder, Richie Rubertone bends his guitar strings farther apart, pulls his vibrato bar harder and comes up with a catchy lyric.
        Mr. Rubertone, 40, who said he was laid off four months ago from his plumbing job at a Bronx company, can usually be found on a corner near Madison Square Garden, leaning against his portable metal newsstand. And playing his guitar. He is a blur of color in front of his black and white stacks: red Fender Mustang guitar, silver and black amplifier, shiny leather jacket. He is selling papers, news -- and his music.
        ''It's tough,'' Mr. Rubertone said. ''I had to come up with an angle. I've been playing and singing since I was a teenager. Battle of the bands, schools. So why not combine my passion with work? People seem to like it.''
        Among Mr. Rubertone's hits: ''Have You Read the Daily News Today, Oh Boy,'' with apologies to the Beatles; ''Wait a Minute, Here's the Post Man'' (The Marvelettes and the Beatles); ''The Times Is on My Stand, Yes It Is'' (The Rolling Stones); and a bonus track -- ''The Times I Am a Selling'' (Bob Dylan). He leans toward rock because he wants to give his customers what they want.
        Mr. Rubertone, who lives in Richmond Hill, Queens, uses the E line as his studio, practicing his tunes and sometimes adding lyrics from news topics.
        His act typically begins at 1:30 p.m. and lasts into the night, depending on sales -- and encores. He makes about $7 an hour plus the occasional tips. His competitors give him mixed reviews.
        ''I have no problem with his performing,'' said Mohit Mitra, whose stand is nearby. ''I would do it, but I can't sing.''
        But Mohmad Rab, who sells papers across the street from Mr. Rubertone, was unimpressed.
        ''I think it's a serious job,'' he said. ''I have established customers. I don't need to do that.''
        Mr. Rubertone has had offers of singing help. ''I had a guy offering to work with me and sing rap,'' he said. ''I said: 'I like rap, but I'm a solo act. No thanks.' And I don't have to share tips.''
        Mr. Rubertone's passion for music can sometimes interfere with his work. On a recent weekday he debated guitarists with one customer as a man with a briefcase waited patiently to pay him for his paper.
        While he hopes for another plumbing job, Mr. Rubertone keeps his own pipes busy and his dream alive. ''Someday I'd like to walk out of the Garden after playing a gig, and buy a paper and read a story about me and my music,'' he said.
        ''I'm pretty close now,'' he added, waving his guitar at the arena. ''Not close enough, but pretty close.''
        INK
      