
        A hedge fund run by Richard C. Breeden, a former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, said yesterday that it would nominate a slate of directors to oppose incumbents at its largest holding, the restaurant chain Applebee's International.
        Mr. Breeden said that his fund, Breeden Capital Management, began buying the stock in July, shortly after the fund began operations, and he had been assured that the board was working on changes to improve performance. The only action taken, he said, has been to require earlier filing of slates for the company's board.
        The fund owns 3.9 million shares, or 5.2 percent of Applebee's. Mr. Breeden said its average cost was under $20 a share. The shares fell 2 cents, to $23.14, in Nasdaq trading yesterday.
        A spokeswoman for the company confirmed it ''has received notification from Breeden Capital Management that they are nominating four candidates for election to the company's board at its 2007 annual meeting. The company reiterated its commitment to delivering near- and long-term value for all shareholders.''
        Mr. Breeden, who served as chairman of the S.E.C. from 1989 to 1993, after being appointed to the post by President George H. W. Bush, recalled that when he was at the commission it had approved rules to make it easier for shareholders to run slates against incumbents.
        Asked if he ever thought while at the S.E.C. that he would become a corporate raider, he demurred. ''No, it didn't cross my mind at the time,'' he said. ''But I wouldn't call us a raider, either. I have tried to be a constructive force.''
        Mr. Breeden was able to raise $650 million for his fund in part because of high-profile jobs involving corporate scandals. He served as the court-appointed monitor at WorldCom, which was renamed MCI when it emerged from bankruptcy and then was acquired by Verizon. He was a consultant hired by directors at Hollinger International, a newspaper publisher that went on to oust and sue its former chairman, Conrad Black.
        The fund invests in underperforming companies, and this is the first time it has sought to wage a shareholder fight.
        Applebee's has a staggered board, and only 4 of the 12 seats will be up for election at the annual meeting in 2007. Among the incumbents Mr. Breeden will oppose is Lloyd L. Hill, the company's chairman, who stepped down as chief executive earlier this year.
        Mr. Breeden said he supported David L. Goebel, the new chief executive, but believed the company should change its strategy by selling some company-owned restaurants and focusing on franchising efforts instead.
        In addition to himself, Mr. Breeden will nominate Steven J. Quamme, a partner in his fund; Raymond G. H. Seitz, a former United States ambassador to Britain who is now chairman of Sun-Times Media (formerly Hollinger International); and Laurence E. Harris, a Washington lawyer who served as a director of MCI after it emerged from bankruptcy.
      