
        Chrysler executives startled investors in late October when they acknowledged that the company had been building tens of thousands of cars on spec to keep its factories humming. Those cars were not included in the company's estimates of its backlog of unsold vehicles on dealer lots -- a figure that was already high by industry standards.
        But Chrysler's chief executive, Thomas W. LaSorda, said Thursday on a company blog that Chrysler would continue to build cars that dealers had not ordered -- just fewer of them.
        At the company's holiday party later, Mr. LaSorda declined to discuss why the company let the inventories build up.
        ''Let's say we did, and we'll get out of it,'' he said. ''I took responsibility for the situation, and I'll get us out of it.''
        As for the turnaround plan that many in Detroit have been expecting from Chrysler, Mr. LaSorda said he would have more to say after the first of the year.
        And so Chrysler -- on a perpetual roller coaster ride in recent decades from financial crises to surging sales from hit products like the 300C sedan -- will probably have more bad news in coming months.
        There has been plenty of bad news already, beyond the backlog of unsold cars. This year, Chrysler lost its No. 3 spot in the American market to Toyota, watched its once-envied profits evaporate, and faced a near rebellion from dealers who were angry at being saddled with an oversupply of mostly gas-thirsty vehicles that were out of step with consumers' demands for more fuel-efficient vehicles.
        ''This year was one to forget for them,'' said Jesse Toprak, an industry analyst with Edmunds.com, which provides car-buying advice.
        Heads have already rolled. Chrysler's German-born marketing chief, Joe Eberhardt, the main target of dealers' ire, left last week to run a Mercedes dealership.
        Mr. LaSorda could soon be leaving Chrysler, too, for a job at its parent, DaimlerChrysler, a senior company official said this week. But at the Thursday night party, Mr. LaSorda said in an interview: ''I'm not worried about my future. It's solid.''
        If Mr. LaSorda is promoted or leaves, that could clear the way for a Volkswagen executive, Wolfgang Bernhard, Chrysler's former president, to return in the top job -- an outcome that some industry analysts have said is likely if Mr. LaSorda vacates his current job.
        For now, though, Mr. LaSorda is racing to put together yet another turnaround plan, which Chrysler is expected to roll out in late January to stem losses that are expected to top $1.2 billion this year.
        The plan, still being written, is expected to include plant closings, job cuts and reductions in spending -- actions that are intended to trim Chrysler's costs by $1,000 a vehicle.
        ''We have to study every part of the company,'' Mr. LaSorda said.
        Chrysler has pulled off turnarounds before with hit products -- besides the 300C, it has scored big hits through the years with its minivans, aggressive pickups built to resemble semis and the PT Cruiser.
        But those earlier comebacks occurred when Detroit companies were still in firm control of the American market. Chrysler must now battle Asian carmakers like Toyota that are in their strongest shape since they began selling cars here nearly five decades ago.
        This year, Chrysler lost market share that it picked up since it introduced the 300C two and a half years ago. Through November, it held just under 13 percent of the American market. At its peak, in the mid-1990s, Chrysler held nearly 17 percent.
        If Mr. LaSorda cannot fix Chrysler, it may find itself with not just a new leader, but potentially a new owner.
        DaimlerChrysler has acknowledged it cannot build a small car at a profit in North America, and is in talks with Chinese companies to build one that it can import.
        Should Daimler officials run out of patience with Chrysler, analysts have said, a Chinese owner might be the logical option to take the company off Daimler's hands.
        A top DaimlerChrysler executive fanned such speculation this summer when, in response to a question, he declined to rule out the possibility of selling off Chrysler. Soon after, the company said Chrysler would not be sold, but the question mark lingers, and analysts have said a Chinese buyer for Chrysler makes sense because such a deal would provide access to the American market.
        Not long ago, Chrysler was in good shape. It was the only Detroit carmaker to gain market share and increase sales in 2005, when it earned a $1.8 billion operating profit, compared with G.M.'s $10.6 billion loss.
        Its previous chief executive, Dieter Zetsche, who now runs DaimlerChrysler, declared numerous times that Chrysler's primary competition was not G.M. or Ford, but Asian auto companies, with their lean operating styles and loyal customers.
        His successor, Mr. LaSorda, declared that 2006 would serve as a transition from traditional Detroit ways to an Asian approach, with flexible plants, little waste and open communication with its workers.
        Instead, Chrysler fell back into a habit that had hurt the company badly in the 1970s: it built far more vehicles than its dealers could sell.
        This summer, as many as 100,000 vehicles sat on lots around metropolitan Detroit, unaccounted for in Chrysler's so-called daily supply numbers, which had already raised analysts' eyebrows for being so high. Incentives have also soared: Chrysler is slicing as much as $10,000 off the $30,000 price of the Dodge Durango, a big S.U.V. whose sales have stalled.
        Profitable through the first half, Chrysler posted a $1.5 billion third-quarter loss and is expected to lose money for the year.
        Even so, Mr. LaSorda and other Chrysler executives insisted that the new models Chrysler had coming, 10 in all, would lift sales again.
        That has not happened. Chrysler's newest vehicles are mainly sport utilities and crossovers, and none have captured the public's interest like the 300C, PT Cruiser or other hot models of the past.
        Now, said Mr. Toprak, ''They have to decide, do we want to be a company with 10 percent market share, or do we want to go with volume?''
        Chrysler workers, meanwhile, are wondering, yet again, what the future holds for them. Rumors are rampant at Chrysler's Windsor, Ontario, assembly plant, just across the river from Detroit, that hundreds of jobs are about to be cut as Chrysler installs automation technology to build its next-generation minivan, which goes into production next year.
        Chrysler officials maintain that fewer than 100 jobs will be eliminated at the factory, which is scheduled to shut for up to three months after the first of the year.
        Still, it is the latest bad news for workers who agreed to wage cuts to keep the company afloat in 1979, and who have watched as other carmakers have closed factories in Windsor.
        Jeff Poisson, who has worked at the Windsor assembly plant for more than 20 years, said the company's problems were partly a result of its merger with Daimler-Benz in 1998. ''When the Germans took over, this plant was making millions,'' he said.
        Other longtime workers are hearing the turnaround talk with trepidation.
        ''When it hits us, we'll feel it,'' said Dorothy Simic, who has worked on the Windsor plant's assembly line for 30 years.
        Still, Ms. Simic described herself as optimistic.
        ''We've been through it before,'' she said.
      