
        The dialogue surrounding the Warner Brothers film ''Blood Diamond'' and its implicit criticism of the diamond industry took a new turn this month, as the hip-hop producer and entertainment mogul Russell Simmons returned from an industry-paid trip to Africa and began vocally defending the diamond trade.
        The trip to Botswana and South Africa was largely paid for and organized by the Diamond Information Center, which handles public relations in the United States for the Diamond Trading Company, the marketing division of De Beers. Benjamin Chavis, a former executive director of the N.A.A.C.P. and a close associate of Mr. Simmons, who traveled to Africa with him, said the trip had been a long-planned project unrelated to the movie. (Mr. Simmons was out of the country on vacation and unavailable to comment.)
        Mr. Simmons entered the diamond trade himself in 2003 with the opening of his Simmons Jewelry Company, which is supplied by De Beers. He has been meaning to visit Africa for some time, and received an invitation from the Diamond Information Center more than a year ago, Mr. Chavis said.
        ''We wanted to see the community where the diamond mine is located, where the diamonds are coming from,'' he said. ''The mission of the trip was not in reaction to the movie.''
        Mr. Chavis said he and Mr. Simmons did not see a problem with participating in the diamond industry, which has historically exploited Africans. ''Russell has always been an entrepreneur who pushes the envelope,'' Mr. Chavis said. ''It shouldn't be controversial to not only want to go into business, but also to make sure that our businesses are doing good deeds.''
        Representatives from the Diamond Information Center declined to say how much the trip cost, although Mr. Chavis said about 14 people were in the group each day, including local security and support staff as well as the 9 people who had traveled from the United States. Mr. Chavis and Mr. Simmons also organized about a third of the itinerary for the nine-day trip independently of the diamond group, which did not pay for those parts of the trip.
        ''Blood Diamond,'' directed by Edward Zwick, depicts some of the violence surrounding the diamond trade in Sierra Leone in the 1990s. It opened on Dec. 8 but has been on the diamond industry's radar for several months. In September, the World Diamond Council, the industry's trade group, began a public relations campaign to counteract any negative publicity.
        Mr. Simmons jumped into the fray upon his return on Dec. 5, giving glowing reviews about the diamond trade and its impact on southern Africa.
        Mr. Zwick, in a Dec. 11 interview with The Daily News, accused Mr. Simmons of being a public relations puppet for the diamond industry; Mr. Simmons and Mr. Chavis retaliated with an open letter in The New York Post on Thursday, saying they were concerned about ''the current wave of misinformation'' about diamonds and that they had observed concrete examples of how the diamond industry ''contributes to the overall self-empowerment of African people and communities.''
        Sally Morrison, the director of the Diamond Information Center, said Mr. Simmons's trip was by happenstance unfortunately close to the film's release. Ms. Morrison, who has organized similar tours of Africa for celebrities like Ashley Judd, said she regretted that scheduling conflicts had forced the trip to be postponed from this summer.
        ''This was planned as a private trip,'' she said. ''We spent a whole bunch of time having to answer to criticisms about the trip when it wasn't anyone's intention for this trip to even engage in the dialogue about the film.''
        MARIA ASPAN
        MEDIA TALK
      