
        Fourteen Christmas trees that were abruptly sent to storage on Friday were back on display Tuesday in the main terminal of Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, neither taller nor brighter than they had been before but clearly drawing more attention.
        ''I saw people taking pictures,'' said Mark Reis, director of Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, referring to the largest tree, which received finishing touches on Tuesday and is on display in the airy south terminal. ''I guess they wanted to say they saw THE tree. I guess it's gotten its level of notoriety.''
        On Friday, faced with the threat of a lawsuit when it refused to add a menorah to its annual holiday display, the airport removed all 14 trees overnight.
        The move, intended to avoid controversy, stoked it instead.
        By early Saturday, television news crews were filming the untrimming, and a holiday-season debate over religion and free speech inevitably took shape. At Chabad-Lubavitch in Seattle, the Jewish Orthodox educational group that had asked the airport to add the menorah, hate messages soon flooded e-mail inboxes. The group, which had never asked for the trees to be removed, was accused by some of trying to steal Christmas. It quickly dropped its talk of a lawsuit and joined those asking the airport to bring back the trees. That, the airport said, freed it to put them back up.
        ''By no means did we want to take away any religious symbols or trees from any other culture,'' said Elazar Bogomilsky, the Chabad rabbi who is listed as the lead plaintiff on a draft lawsuit that has not been filed.
        The draft suit names the Port of Seattle, which runs the airport, as the lead defendant.
        ''The port went ahead and made this very poor decision,'' Rabbi Bogomilsky said. ''They said, 'Whoa, we can't deal with this.' ''
        Mr. Reis said, ''The rabbi never said, 'We want to take the trees down.' That was purely our reaction when we felt we'd been put in an untenable position.''
        There is disagreement over how it came to this. An airport architect who has been involved with Chabad had asked to add the menorah to the display.
        Rabbi Bogomilsky said his group was initially told that a menorah could be displayed, ''then all of a sudden there was a no, and then zero dialogue, just a stone wall between the port and us.''
        Mr. Reis said he rejected the idea because the airport had long ago revised its holiday display to be what he called secular.
        ''It's just lights and snowflakes,'' he said, and ''holiday trees.''
        Adding a menorah could mean having to add symbols of other religions, and that could give the display unintended religious meaning, he said. ''If you were going to add one, then where do you stop?'' he said.
        The draft of the lawsuit cites a 1989 decision by the United States Supreme Court upholding the dual display of the menorah and Christmas trees in public places as expression that is protected under the First Amendment. The draft suit says the plaintiffs would suffer irreparable harm if they are not allowed to display the menorah by Friday, Dec. 15, because Hanukkah begins at sundown that day.
        Rabbi Bogomilsky said the threat of a lawsuit was meant only to show seriousness. ''It wasn't about suing; we never filed anything, and made it very clear that we are not going to file,'' he said. ''We said that we have the option. We said we're getting close to Hanukkah and we need to know what your decision is, and they jumped the gun and said, 'We can't deal with it, we're going to remove everything.' ''
        Mr. Reis said: ''We ended up with a demand that we make a decision in X amount of time or face a lawsuit. We really did not have the time to step back and make a decision about what is the right ecumenical thing to do.''
        He added, ''I think there's no question that we all regret the atmospherics that developed over this whole issue.'' He said the airport authority would reconsider the issue next year.
        Robert S. Jacobs, director for the Pacific Northwest region of the Anti-Defamation League, said the airport, as an entry point to the Northwest, ''missed a great opportunity to demonstrate to the entire world the sort of pluralistic, cosmopolitan city Seattle has become.''
      