
        The prospect of change blew through the seaside fishing hamlet of Montauk in the town of East Hampton at the very tip of Long Island recently: A real estate brokerage firm publicized a listing for Gosman's Dock, an 11-acre tourist destination, for $55 million.
        Gosman's, on the western side of the inlet to Montauk harbor from Block Island Sound, includes a restaurant with outdoor seating, a cafe, a clam bar, shops, a fish market, an ice cream parlor, two motels, several houses and vacant and commercial lots.
        The complex, started more than 60 years ago by John and Mary Gosman as a chowder stand, grew with land acquisitions in the 1950s, according to Gosman Dock's Web site. The property is now owned by the Gosmans' six children, who also run the different businesses.
        The eldest son, John Gosman, was quoted in November in a local weekly newspaper rebutting a report that Gosman's Dock was for sale.
        Nevertheless, the $55 million listing remains on the Web site of Brown Harris Stevens, a real estate agency known for its high-end sales. The listing agents, Tony Cerio and Mitch Natter, declined to comment, though Brown Harris Stevens's communications office confirmed that the property was for sale.
        None of the Gosman siblings returned calls. Real estate brokers were reluctant to be quoted about the property, and some speculated that there was disagreement about the sale among some family members.
        ''If they could all agree, it's a steal,'' said Judi Desiderio, a broker with Town and Country real estate in East Hampton, who is currently listing East Hampton Point, a smaller restaurant, marina and high-end hotel complex farther west in East Hampton; that asking price is also $55 million.
        If all of the Gosmans' holdings on Lake Montauk and the inlet to Montauk Harbor, which are connected, are included in the asking price, Ms. Desiderio said, ''it's too cheap.''
        That such a landmark and tourism draw could, at the very least, change hands is seen by some as a sign of the times. And for developers, it could be a sign that this is the time to buy in Montauk. Paul Monte, the chief executive of Gurney's Inn, a 50-year-old resort and spa, said the recent interest in the hamlet is ''a signal that Montauk has been discovered, for all the good and bad that brings.''
        John Keeshan, a longtime resident and owner of Keeshan Real Estate, said, ''There is certainly a dramatic change in the economic character of Montauk.'' Increasingly, it is emerging as a second-home market, and house ''prices in the last five years doubled, if not tripled,'' he said. ''That's pretty astonishing.''
        Mr. Keeshan has published tongue-in-cheek advertisements over the years celebrating Montauk's rugged and small-village fisherman's haven flavor as opposed to the gourmet supermarkets and boutiques that line Main Street in the village of East Hampton to the west.
        These include lines like ''still more lobsters than people,'' ''our star gazing means really looking at the sky at night'' and ''too far out for designer stores.'' But with the arrival of the trendy clothing boutique Calypso (which also has stores in St. Bart's and East Hampton village), that last claim will have to be updated, he said.
        Other high-end shops may follow, buoyed by low rents and the cachet of wealthy residents. Paul Simon, Julian Schnabel and Dick Cavett, among others, have had homes for years on the high rugged Montauk ocean bluffs that offer relative privacy with 10-acre zoning outside the downtown area.
        But new buyers are snatching up smaller homes in other areas of Montauk and tearing them down for bigger structures, Mr. Keeshan said. ''Montauk is becoming a rich man's playground,'' he said.
        The prospect of further development aimed at rich buyers and tourists is acknowledged by officials. ''There's no doubt that when you get wealthy people living in this community, then what follows is very high-end businesses to meet their needs,'' said Debra Brodie Foster, an East Hampton Town Board member.
        But while many hamlets in the towns of East Hampton and Southampton have changed from summer destinations to affluent year-round communities, most restaurants and tourist shops in Montauk, including Gosman's Dock, close in the winter.
        Daniel Lee, one of five investors planning to convert the eight-acre Shepherd's Neck Inn in Montauk to a high-end resort, thinks the hamlet ''definitely has the potential to become a year-round place,'' he said. With younger and hipper restaurants and resorts to replace the older family-run establishments like, possibly, Gosman's Dock, Mr. Lee says a future Montauk could draw a Miami Beach-style crowd.
        Turning Montauk into the Miami Beach of the North is not a new idea. Before the stock market crash of 1929, Carl G. Fisher, who with a partner turned a Florida swamp into Miami Beach, wanted to bring luxury resorts and casinos to Montauk.
        The Depression and falling land prices in Florida ruined Mr. Fisher, but some of his grand Montauk structures still survive, and prosper. They include the channel he dredged to connect Lake Montauk to the sound, opening the way for the Montauk Yacht Club (also for sale); a seven-story office building in the downtown that is now condominiums, and an estate on the ocean.
        While brokers say it would take years for a developer to get zoning approvals to build condos or a hotel on waterfront property like Gosman's Dock today, the town of East Hampton is in the midst of a study to define a vision for business and residential development in Montauk.
        The town once permitted 40 units per acre in the hamlet before the zoning was scaled back in 1984 to 6 units per acre, Ms. Foster said. Montauk lacks a sewer system and the drinking-water aquifer is close to sea level in that area, she added, so higher densities would require major infrastructure development.
        On the other hand, much of the 11 acres of Gosman's Dock is zoned as ''resort,'' instead of the more restrictive classification of ''waterfront.'' With town approval, resort districts permit condominiums and hotels.
        ''If we didn't want to see some kind of residential in that area, we wouldn't have zoned it that way,'' Ms. Foster said.
      