
        Snake was always a loner, a tough operative who could single-handedly penetrate deep into enemy territory and save the world with nothing but a knife and a tranquilizer gun. But in Kojima's stealth-action game Metal Gear Solid: Portable Ops, Snake has met the fate of so many talented men before him; he has been unwillingly promoted to a management position.
        Portable Ops, for PlayStation Portable, starts six months after the end of Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake Eater. Snake has left the shadowy organization he worked for after killing his mentor, but he is soon dragged back into the action after a military commander takes over a secret weapons base and plots to blow up a big chunk of the planet.
        At first the game follows the standard formula of the Metal Gear series. Snake can sneak up silently behind enemy soldiers and choke them into unconsciousness or shoot them with tranquilizer darts. He can flatten himself against walls and peek around corners or crawl through air vents.
        A soldier who catches a glimpse of Snake will raise the alarm, and Snake will have to hide in a locker or under a truck until things calm down. In the meantime, the player can generally put down the game and spend a minute checking e-mail or dusting the apartment. If you don't have that sort of patience, you can also just grab a machine gun and wipe out the whole base.
        The forces arrayed against Snake are so vast that soon he reluctantly agrees to start recruiting enemy combatants to his side, convincing them that following a ruthless madman intent on destroying the world is a bad career choice. Recruitment involves knocking a soldier unconscious and dragging him back to the truck Snake uses to travel from mission to mission.
        Snake's recruits can be assigned to a medical unit to create first-aid kits or to a technical unit to create ammunition, or they can be used as spies to give Snake valuable information about places he must infiltrate. In spite of his new management duties, Snake still goes out on missions, but now he brings a team; the player controls one character while the others hide in cardboard boxes.
        There are a few types of enemies -- ski-masked thugs, officers, doctors -- and when these are recruited, they can be used as undercover agents who can coolly walk through enemy territory unnoticed as long as they don't act suspicious or get too close to an enemy.
        Oddly enough, though, enemies are distrustful of anyone who doesn't look exactly like them, so a thug recruit can walk past a thug enemy unhindered but will be immediately attacked by an enemy officer. This doesn't make much sense, but it does keep the game from being too easy.
        Portable Ops is typical of Metal Gear games. Much of it is brilliant, but it can also be highly annoying. When switching soldiers on a mission, you are not given enough information to figure out which soldier is the best choice; you need to memorize their names or just take them out one at a time to see them. The camera is awkward to deal with. Dragging soldiers back to the truck is tedious.
        Optional missions to retrieve advanced weaponry are nothing more than randomly wandering around looking for well-hidden weapons; I looked all over for a tranquilizer-dart sniper rifle and couldn't find it even after abducting every single enemy soldier in an area so I could explore it without being bothered.
        Designing for a hand-held console, Portable Ops' creators have wisely streamlined the game. Metal Gear games are known for elaborate cinematic story sequences that sometimes last half an hour or more. Portable Ops has the same convoluted storytelling and offbeat characters as the other games, and once again the drama veers from affecting to silly, but story sequences rarely pass the five-minute mark.
        Missions are also very short. While learning the layout of an area might take a while and result in a few deaths, once you know exactly where you are going you can often get there in a minute or two. This may disappoint Metal Gear fans used to the lengthy, elaborate missions of previous games, but it is ideal on a console you use while waiting for the train.
        There is a lot to Portable Ops, which offers a wealth of weapons and varying approaches to playing the game. There is, on the other hand, very little to Ubisoft's first-person shooter Red Steel, but the game has a couple of neat tricks that make it more entertaining than it should be.
        Red Steel, for Nintendo's new Wii game console, begins as the protagonist prepares to meet his girlfriend's father, a Japanese mobster. After a shootout and the girlfriend's abduction, you have to pick up a gun and start shooting an inexhaustible supply of bad guys. They tend to get very angry if you shoot their friends, but in spite of being hardened criminals armed with machine guns, they are constantly yelling ''murderer!'' at you as you gun them down.
        Red Steel relies entirely on the Wii's motion-sensitive controller for its entertainment value. The Wii controller has two parts; the remote, which looks like a TV remote and can be used like a pointer, and the nunchuk, which is held in the other hand. Point the remote at the television screen and press the trigger to fire a gun, swing the nunchuk down to open a door or swing it up to knock a table over to use as cover. To zoom in with a sniper rifle, push the remote toward the TV.
        This takes some getting used to, and some things are always awkward. When I tried to roll grenades along the floor, they usually exploded three feet away from me. But the novelty is refreshing.
        Every once in a while, after running through room after room shooting armed thugs, you will enter an area inhabited by one guy with a steel pipe or saber. Your gun will suddenly be replaced with a samurai sword and you will duel by waving and slashing your remote and blocking with a shake of the nunchuk.
        Personally, if I had a gun and saw a guy with a sword, I would just shoot him. But the designers clearly wanted to have some sword fights in the game and did not see any reason that this should make any sense.
        Playing with the controller is so much fun that it takes a while to realize that the game is pretty unexceptional. You basically run into a room, shoot a bunch of guys and do that again and again. There are some nice ideas, like a shootout in a car wash, but for the most part this is a conventional, predictable shooter. Sure, it gets the job done, but it doesn't do that job nearly well enough to qualify for a management position.
        METAL GEAR SOLID: PORTABLE OPS  Developed by Kojima Productions and published by Konami Digital Entertainment for PlayStation Portable; for ages 17 and up; $39.99.
        RED STEEL  Developed by Ubisoft Paris and published by Ubisoft for Nintendo Wii; for ages 13 and up; $49.99.
        GAME THEORY E-mail: herold@nytimes.com
      