
        AT noon on a Saturday the cafe at the Martin Wine Cellar in Metairie, a New Orleans suburb, is so crowded that it's as if Katrina had never happened. But when Albert Ledner, an 82-year-old architect, and his wife, Judy, 81, bump into acquaintances there, the conversation is a familiar post-traumatic checklist: Are you O.K.? Where are you living? How's the house?
        The couple chat with a cousin's mother-in-law, who describes how she discovered pieces of her crystal collection unbroken in the muck inside her house, gently set down by the receding floodwaters. Mrs. Ledner counters with a small miracle of her own, about the watercolor she was working on when she and her husband of 55 years fled their house in the nearby Lakewood South subdivision ahead of the storm. The table where she painted was buoyed by five feet of water, then set back in place so gently that the paintings and paints were unharmed and exactly as she left them. ''It was so strange,'' Mrs. Ledner says.
        The Ledners' entire house, in fact, appears to be one of these post-Katrina miracles. Designed and built by Mr. Ledner in the mid-1950s, the house, which has the jaunty silhouette of a World's Fair pavilion, looks as fragile as a piece of cut crystal. It was flooded for weeks, and the elegant built-in furniture was left warped and moldy, the fine-grained Arkansas pine paneling was stained and a lifetime's worth of possessions were ruined. Mr. Ledner considered tearing much of it down. But there it stands, denuded of most of its landscaping but largely rebuilt, the comfortable, unconventional homestead the Ledners have known for 50 years.
        The house is one of 40 or so modern but eccentric New Orleans residences that Mr. Ledner has designed over six decades, and that have made him something of a local institution. (The most famous, built in 1962 for a pair of ardent smokers, has a procession of 1,200 gold glass ashtrays running just below its roofline; it now belongs to the mayor of New Orleans, C. Ray Nagin.)
        Mr. Ledner's architecture, if not his name, is also known in New York, where he designed a few characteristically oddball buildings for the National Maritime Union in the 1960s, including what is now the Maritime Hotel. The buildings came to be seen as weird white elephants of Modernism within a few years of their construction, but the recent vogue for unorthodox midcentury style has started to change that view, giving rise to a new appreciation of the Ledner look.
        The Ledner building that the architect was most concerned with in August and September of 2005, of course, was the couple's house: two circular wings of 1,000 square feet each, each under a 12-point star of a roof supported by harp-shaped buttresses. At first, as Katrina roared across the Gulf of Mexico, Albert and Judy Ledner planned to ride out the storm there, unfazed by the fact that their property backs directly on the 17th Street Canal. But they were persuaded to get out at the last minute by their son Robert, a Microsoft project manager who lives in Boulder, Colo., and they took refuge in a downtown Holiday Inn.
        On the Tuesday morning after Katrina, when Mr. Ledner saw the downtown streets filling with water, he hiked up the ramps of a deserted parking garage, found his car, picked up Mrs. Ledner and plowed through a foot of water onto the depopulated Interstate highway to Baton Rouge. The couple stayed in a shelter there until they were able to fly to Los Angeles to stay with their daughter, Catherine, a photographer.
        More than a month later, summoned by an insurance adjuster, they returned.
        ''I guess I was shocked,'' Mrs. Ledner said. ''From the outside it wasn't so bad, but inside  ''
        The breach of the 17th Street Canal had happened about two miles north of their house, though the levee directly behind them had held. Flooding in their neighborhood had reached only about half the 11 feet that occurred in Lakeview North. But the damage was still severe. Mr. Ledner described a scene in which ''everything that could float had floated all over'' and ''mold was everywhere.''
        Still, he said: ''You don't stand around thinking about, 'Oh, isn't this terrible.' You're thinking in terms of what you can salvage.''
        Catherine Ledner accompanied her parents along with her elder brother David. ''We took all the records, all the books, all the clothing and all the bedding,'' she said. ''It was horrible to throw away a life.''
        The Ledners returned to New Orleans for good in January and rented a condo. While Mrs. Ledner had entertained thoughts of staying in California, Mr. Ledner never wavered: ''We had too much of an investment here.'' He did, however, consider demolishing most of the original house and moving into the 1962 addition behind it, an annex with a bunkerlike precast concrete playroom on the ground floor and a glass and wood design studio upstairs.
        ''I started making drawings of converting the rear building and studio into a residence,'' he said, while he weighed demolishing the back part of the original house -- the bedrooms -- and removing the walls of the front ''so we would have a big gazebo.'' Then Mr. Ledner heard rumors that the Army Corps of Engineers might buy up a narrow strip of property along the canal that would most likely run directly beneath the annex, as part of an effort to reinforce the levee. He worried that if he proceeded with his own plan, ''we'd end up with a gazebo and nothing else.''
        Instead, he began in January to renovate the main house, pulling out ruined built-in furniture -- sofas, tables, shelving and cabinetry -- with the help of a neighborhood college student and two of his friends. A client who owned a contracting company offered the services of his team, beginning with the arduous job of removing the mold that covered every surface but the ceiling.
        The dark wood interior paneling was so badly stained by water that even bleaching didn't help, so Mr. Ledner finally had it painted white and used cypress plywood to replace panels ripped out for wiring repairs. The interior is now predominantly white with stripes of wood-grain veneer.
        While Mr. Ledner had workers do the heavy lifting, he devoted himself to salvaging and reconfiguring the offbeat details that give the house much of its character. He had made his own light fixtures, for example, like his hero Frank Lloyd Wright (for whom he worked at Taliesin in Wisconsin for a few months after graduating from college in 1948). He was able to rescue and restore most of the pieces: mahogany frames holding shards of Coke and wine bottles embedded in translucent polyester -- a poor man's version of stained glass.
        The Ledners were able to move back into their house, emptier than it once was but largely restored, in early November. The rear building on the property, left in limbo by the uncertainty of the Army Engineers' plans, remains a ruin, but most of its inventive architectural details are still there. The impossibly narrow circular stairway, with treads separated by colored-glass Japanese fishing-net floats, still leads to the studio. And although Katrina's winds blew in the studio's huge plate glass windows, the ceiling above remains intact, an intricate arrangement of slatted wood reminiscent of Scandinavia or Japan.
        Now that life has returned to a semblance of normality, Mr. Ledner can return to his drafting table -- he prefers pencil renderings to the computer-generated variety -- satisfied that his most inventive building, his own house, has survived, and equally pleased that one of his grandest creations has also found a new life as a hotel.
        One of his New York designs -- the National Maritime Union's white-tiled headquarters on Seventh Avenue, now part of St. Vincent's Manhattan Hospital -- had attracted modest praise from the critic Ada Louise Huxtable in The New York Times when it was completed in 1964. But Mr. Ledner was well aware of the disdain with which it and his other New York buildings, the largest commissions of his career, had since come to be regarded.
        Indeed, the Maritime Union dormitory on Ninth Avenue between 16th and 17th Streets had been derided from the start for the porthole-style windows that dot its facade. In 1987 Mayor Edward I. Koch threatened to turn it into a prison, and nine years later, in the cruelest blow, the lower floors of Mr. Ledner's adjoining union training center on 17th Street were made over to look like a cartoonish stage set of a brownstone block. Mr. Ledner's building ''didn't have too many redeeming qualities,'' John Behrmann, the architect who designed the new facade, was quoted in The Times as saying in 1996. ''The sloping facade had total lack of human scale.''
        So Mr. Ledner was understandably pleased when the nightclub impresarios Eric Goode and Sean MacPherson teamed up with developers to transform it into the Maritime, a boutique hotel appointed with painstakingly appropriate period details. Mr. MacPherson recently said he had admired the dormitory building ''forever.''
        ''It was a welcome relief to see it had been taken over by someone who appreciated the basic building,'' Mr. Ledner said.
        For those who will never get to experience the ingenuity of the Ledner family home, or of Mr. Ledner's other New Orleans-area houses, there are still the restaurant and the nightclub in the basement of the hotel, occupying the cavernous former Maritime Union hiring hall. There any visitor can walk in and look up, and admire a dizzying, monumental version of the slatted ceiling Mr. Ledner created for his studio.
      