
        Name changes have become trendy with the Philadelphia Eagles.
        At the beginning of the season, the left tackle previously known as Tra Thomas announced that he wanted to be called William Thomas. Nobody argued, especially since Thomas is 6 feet 7 inches, 335 pounds, and has been to the Pro Bowl three times.
        Recently, the Eagles added another player with a new name who will have strong emotions entering Sunday afternoon's showdown against the Giants. William James, the defensive back known as Will Peterson during five seasons with the Giants, has been anticipating facing his former team since he signed with the Eagles on Oct. 30.
        James said he had never seen the visitor's locker room at Giants Stadium. But he will see it Sunday, when he and the Eagles face the division rival Giants in their pursuit of a playoff berth. Both teams enter the game with a 7-6 record.
        ''It's exciting and it comes at an exciting time,'' James said. ''We have an opportunity to make the playoffs, and we control our own destiny.
        ''This is what you visualize and anticipate coming back to, when you make a decision like I did, to come to the Philadelphia Eagles. I came hoping that we'd have to go up there and see the Giants and play for something big. It doesn't get any bigger.''
        James was coy this week when asked why he changed his name. His birth name was William James Peterson, but he legally changed his last name to James and dropped Peterson, partly because he said he felt that with Eagles he would be making a fresh start.
        ''It had a lot to do with my personal life, changing purpose in my life,'' said James, a 27-year-old native of Uniontown, Pa., who finished college at Western Illinois after transferring from Michigan.
        ''Things happened that have brought simplicity to my life, things that made me change. It just made sense at that time to change my name. I try not to talk about it during the football season. Right now, I'm here to play football and to focus on the games ahead.''
        For James, the opportunity to play in the N.F.L. has become more precious. He was a budding star early in his career, breaking into the Giants' starting lineup as a rookie in 2001 after being drafted in the third round. But James's career took a negative turn in 2003, when he sustained a stress fracture in his back. He recovered to start every game in 2004, but the back trouble resurfaced in 2005, keeping him sidelined for all but two games. The Giants released him in May, and James said he held no ill will toward the team's front office and coaching staff.
        ''It was a serious injury, I guess they had to make a decision, and they chose to move on,'' James said. ''It was serious enough where I may not have come back, so I don't knock them.''
        James's agent, Ron Slavin, said James should be admired for persevering through his health problems. To an athlete, especially, a back injury is always a concern.
        ''But William remained strong, and worked hard to strengthen the muscles in his back,'' Slavin said in a telephone interview Wednesday. ''I know he has been looking forward to this game, and I know he's thrilled to be back on the field.''
        Used as an extra defensive back in passing situations, James has already helped his new team. Last week against Washington, James deflected a pass that was intercepted by Michael Lewis, who returned the ball 84 yards for a touchdown.
        ''Will did a great job of breaking it up,'' Lewis said of the interception. ''It popped up in the air, and I just made a play on it.''
        At 6 feet, James is one of the Eagles' tallest defensive backs, and they may look to match him against Plaxico Burress of the Giants, who is 6-5.
        James will be a free agent after the season, so he is not certain where he will play next. But during his short time with the Eagles, he has quickly found a comfort level in Philadelphia. And others have grown accustomed to his new name.
        ''The name looks good on his jersey,'' Slavin said.
        PRO FOOTBALL
      