
        The period between 1750 and 1800 yielded some of classical music's greatest masterpieces and yet is one of its least well known. (Challenge: quickly name three composers active in those fertile years who weren't Haydn and Mozart.) This season, New York acquired a brand-new period-instrument ensemble, dubbed the Grand Tour Orchestra for, presumably, its goal of guiding Anglophones on figurative voyages of discovery across the European continent, and focusing on precisely this period.
        But when the Grand Tour Orchestra concluded its inaugural (three-concert) season at the Italian Academy at Columbia University on Wednesday night, its program lay outside its targeted epoch. This stop on the tour was Venice, around the 1740s. The main focus was sacred motets by two superstar opera composers of the period: Baldassare Galuppi and Johann Adolf Hasse. There was also one work by a prolific Italian composer who was nearly forgotten after his death, a guy named Antonio Vivaldi.
        The general idea may have been to show how skewed the vantage point of posterity is by spotlighting now-neglected brilliance. Galuppi was the main theme of the program, the second half of which was given to a virtuosic concerto a quattro for strings and a motet, ''A Rupe Alpestri'' (From Alpine Heights), that was tethered to religion by the faintest of threads, but bobbed nonetheless squarely in the realm of a dramatic scena, with the vocal soloist cowering in a wilderness delineated by interval leaps and the soft singing of breathless panic.
        Yet the program also showed that posterity wasn't wrong to honor Vivaldi, represented by a vivid ''Salve Regina'' (RV 616) for double orchestra and soloist that moved from lively spunk to yearning (accompanied by a flute solo played by the orchestra's founder and conductor, Charles Brink) to unison affirmation and beyond.
        The orchestra was willing and energetic, playing with an involved enthusiasm that was more important than absolute cleanness. A difficulty of the program was that three of the four pieces showcased a vocal soloist: a large burden to place on any singer. Jennifer Lane, a mezzo, was uneven: she had a strong, impressive top and rich low notes, but in between were areas that were sometimes half-spoken, or inaudible -- or under-prepared. Toward the end of the second piece, however, Hasse's ''Gentes barbarae'' (Barbaric people), she suddenly hit her stride in long runs of silvery coloratura, just at the moment of divine resolution in the text. It was as if a ray of pure silver light had broken through patchy clouds; and from her radiant smile, she knew it.
        MUSIC REVIEW
      