
        As Albany prepares for what is being promised as the newer, cleaner Eliot Spitzer administration, you do not have to be much of a cynic to wonder if the regulars in New York State's government can find a way not to clean up their acts
        One possibility would be for the lawmakers to define what they are already doing as ethical. We know that what they're doing is mostly legal -- even the most scandalous behavior, whether it's misusing campaign funds or drawing districts to ensure lifetime employment, is technically legal mainly because they have done nothing to make it illegal.
        But ethical it isn't.
        Another way to avoid reform is to make certain that the people overseeing things do not see much of anything bad around them. That is the way they do it in Washington. But even in Albany, a few officials try to hold our public servants and their very rich friends up to public scrutiny.
        One is David Grandeau, executive director of the New York Temporary State Commission on Lobbying. The commission is in business to oversee Albany's lobbyists and to make sure that they obey the law when dealing with legislators and state government.
        In carrying out that charge, Mr. Grandeau has infuriated almost every bigwig in Albany, mostly to his credit.
        Originally promoted for the job by Joseph Bruno, the Senate majority leader, Mr. Grandeau and his agency have been investigating the questionable way a lobbyist has provided Mr. Bruno with a private plane. Mr. Grandeau, who can be combative and argumentative, also investigated a deal the Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, got on a very expensive hotel room in Las Vegas. He once locked horns with Attorney General Spitzer over the future of the lobbying law and neither man has ever forgotten it.
        Now there are rumbles that the abrasive Mr. Grandeau should once again watch his own back -- that his enemies see the new administration as an opportunity to get rid of him once and for all. Many people who really want a cleaner Albany can agree with Blair Horner, head of Albany's branch of the New York Public Interest Research Group.
        ''If these conspiracies are successful, it sends a chilling message to ethics enforcers in the state,'' Mr. Horner said last week. ''If you do your job, you get fired. He's the only one of the enforcers who's been out there really bagging the big game.''
        Like everyone else who has dealt with Mr. Grandeau, we do not always agree with him or approve of his style. But as an ethics watchdog, he has done better than most in a place where too often what is ethical depends on how the people in charge define it. He has been in the job for 11 years, and nobody should stay in a job like that forever. But any replacement must be as strong, independent and unafraid of the powers in Albany as Mr. Grandeau. Otherwise, he should be left in place.
        The City | Long Island | Westchester
      