
        Ebenezer Scrooge has been through a lot in his 163 years as the hateful, humbug-muttering protagonist of ''A Christmas Carol,'' but he has rarely awakened to find a small army of angry poor people in his bedroom, singing about their displeasure.
        Tazewell Thompson, who wrote and directed the intriguing, somewhat untraditional version of Charles Dickens's holiday classic now at the Westport Country Playhouse, has a point. Why have those downtrodden Londoners, begging in the streets or working for a few shillings a week, been so nice all these years? They have overwhelming problems, and Scrooge (who has more money than he can count) is so unsympathetic that he wants them all sent to prisons and workhouses.
        Mr. Tazewell's ''Christmas Carol'' follows Dickens's mid-19th-century tale closely. On Christmas Eve, the miserly businessman Scrooge (Wynn Harmon) is visited by the ghost of his former business partner and three spirits, who melt his hard heart and teach him to love Christmas and his fellow man. Scrooge wakes up determined, among other things, to help the family of his clerk, Bob Cratchit (Nick Cordileone), which includes a cheerful, but doomed, crippled son, Tim (Luke Sauer, alternating with Adam Riegler).
        The production reflects some unusual style choices. Christmas Past (Forrest McClendon), normally depicted as gentle, ethereal and (more often than not) female, is a bald man with a booming, hostile voice, bare-chested in a golden harem-pants costume that Yul Brynner might have worn in ''The King and I.'' Christmas Future (Shannon Bolcer) is an Englishwoman apparently dressed for hunting, complete with top hat, veil and velvet jacket. Marley's Ghost (Howard Kaye) carries a lot of chains but seems more Shakespearean than otherworldly.
        The show's look is deliberately somber, with most characters in neutral period costumes (grays, blacks and browns) by Randall E. Klein. Donald Eastman's set design is appropriately dingy and factorylike, but who thought it would be a good idea to have a long conference table double as Scrooge's bed?
        Scrooge himself is even meaner than usual. In this version he deliberately trips a little blind girl in the street and steals the coins in her cap. But that may be why the poignancy is so stinging when he is stricken later, hearing his nephew's party guests laughingly compare him to a savage beast.
        The strength of this ''Christmas Carol'' is the abundance of period music. Some of the two dozen or so selections are well-known carols like ''What Child Is This?'' and ''Here We Come a-Wassailing.'' Others, like ''Now Thrice Welcome Christmas'' and ''Personent Hodie,'' were old in Dickens's time.
        This production may not delight children as much as lighter versions of the story, but it clearly has something to say. The social reformer in Dickens would have approved of that. And even though the normally buoyant Cratchits seem a bit depressed at their Christmas dinner, Tiny Tim saves the day with an odd ability. He makes walking with a crutch look -- sorry, but it's true -- cute.
        A Christmas Carol --  A Ghost Story of Christmas
        In Hartford Stage's rousing, crowd-pleasing ''Christmas Carol -- A Ghost Story of Christmas,'' now in its ninth year, Dickens's classic becomes particularly spooky.
        In addition to the ghoulish specter of Jacob Marley, who emerges through a trap door from a smoke-filled hell, and the spirits of Christmas past, present and future, this production introduces half a dozen additional ghosts. They are all in white, including their scary masks, their 18th-century apparel and their wigs, and one of them flies.
        Bill Raymond plays Scrooge for laughs much of the time, at one point dipping into a Groucho Marx walk. While having his evening cup of cider, he burps. Waking up frightened on Christmas morning, he cries ''My blankie!'' like a toddler.
        This Scrooge is an easy emotional mark as well, noticeably softened during the first spirit's first time-traveling stop in his childhood and deeply remorseful at the end. His housekeeper is played by a man (Bill Kux, who doubles as Marley) in Victorian drag.
        This is a deceptively spare production, with a basic set consisting of wooden staircases and a wooden bridge against a gray-blue London backdrop, but the style is in the details. The Spirit of Christmas Past (Johanna Morrison) arrives in a sleigh, escorted by a group of children beautifully dressed in red. The Spirit of Christmas Present (Alan Rust) is a particularly lovely symbol of abundance and celebration in a red brocade robe trimmed in fur and a holly wreath with candles on his head. The scary Spirit of Christmas Future (played by Himself, according to the program) makes his imposing entrance on a gigantic antique bicycle.
        The Hartford Stage ''Christmas Carol'' has seasonal music, too, if only a few lines from each song. Young carolers do a bit of ''Hark! The Herald Angels Sing,'' ''O Come, All Ye Faithful,'' ''Good King Wenceslas'' and a number of other carols. Scrooge's sister, Fan (Alejandra Melian-Morse, alternating with Sarah Oliver), sings ''Barbara Allen,'' which those of us devoted to the 1951 ''Christmas Carol'' with Alastair Sim now think of as a holiday song.
        The Santaland Diaries
        Imagine a snowy winter wonderland as seen by Salvador Dali, and there you have Jessica Ford's set for the bitterly witty Long Wharf production of ''The Santaland Diaries.'' It seems absolutely appropriate for a show that begins with an unseen narrator welcoming the audience to ''the frontlines of the war against Christmas.''
        To appreciate this show fully, you should know its origins in truth. When David Sedaris, humor writer extraordinaire, first moved to New York, hoping to break into show business, he applied for and won a job as a Christmas elf at Macy's. This one-hour monologue is an excerpt of his memories from that traumatic experience, previously read on National Public Radio and turned into a 1996 Off Broadway play adapted by Joe Mantello. Unfortunately Mr. Sedaris did not play himself.
        At Long Wharf, the stand-in for Mr. Sedaris is Thomas Sadoski, who does an entertaining if slightly tepid job of conveying total humiliation. He frequently gets laughs just by looking wickedly amused at the horrifying information he has just shared.
        ''I'm a 33-year-old man looking for a job as an elf,'' he says while still appearing completely normal in an everyday ensemble of sweater and pants. Then, piece by piece, he dons the costume of his character, Crumpet, which includes horizontally striped red and green tights, sparkly green shorts, elf shoes with curly toes and a stocking cap. (Olivera Gajic designed this inspired fashion nightmare.)
        ''We were asked why we wanted to be elves,'' he recalls. ''Which, when you think of it, is a pretty tough question.''
        Mr. Sedaris found plenty of material on the job. He recalls parents who virtually tortured their children to get great photographs of them with a department-store Santa Claus. He remembers Santa Jerome, who wasn't ''black enough'' for some African-American parents, and Santa Doug, who spat on the children.
        Young Crumpet bonded with his fellow elves. Flaky was an artist, Walrus a self-described ladies' man, Snowball adorable, and Sleighbell had been on ''One Life to Live.''
        Crumpet was not always a cooperative employee. When one Santa insisted that he sing ''Away in a Manger'' for a visiting child, he finally complied. But he did the hymn in the style of Billie Holiday, giving a performance that included the mimicking of an intravenous heroin fix.
        At least that's the way Mr. Sedaris tells the story.
        ''A Christmas Carol'' is at the Westport Country Playhouse, 25 Powers Court, through Dec. 30. Information: (203) 227-4177 or westportplayhouse.org.
        ''A Christmas Carol -- A Ghost Story of Christmas'' is at Hartford Stage, 50 Church Street, through Dec. 30. Information: (860) 527-5151 or hartfordstage.org.
        ''The Santaland Diaries'' is at the Long Wharf Theater, 222 Sargent Drive, New Haven, through Dec 31. Information: (203) 787-4282 or longwharf.org.
        THEATER REVIEW
      