
        The two women, good friends for years, lived not 10 blocks away from each other in Queens, coming and going in a 1996 Honda Accord with Eileen Gillespie, 69, the younger of them, always behind the wheel.
        They both lived alone, one a widow and the other divorced, and often went shopping or to Manhattan for a show or a movie together, neighbors said, adding that they attended the same Catholic church, Resurrection Ascension, in Elmhurst, Queens.
        On Tuesday night, Ms. Gillespie and Margaret Bartichek, 74, went to an annual holiday party for employees of Representative Joseph Crowley, who represents part of Queens and part of the Bronx, at a Queens restaurant.
        It would be their last outing together.
        They were headed home about 12:50 a.m. yesterday, the police said, when Ms. Gillespie, heading south on 69th Street in Elmhurst, failed to turn off it where it became one way northbound, near the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway, and was hit by a Lincoln Town Car, which pushed her car into a parked pickup truck. There are do-not-enter signs at 34th Avenue, where southbound traffic is supposed to turn off 69th Street.
        Ms. Bartichek was pronounced dead at Elmhurst Hospital Center. Mrs. Gillespie was also at Elmhurst, in stable condition. The Lincoln's driver did not require hospitalization.
        The police said that the crash was more than a chance accident.
        According to the police, Ms. Gillespie refused to take a breathalyzer test at the accident scene. They said they then contacted the Queens district attorney's office, which obtained a court order for a blood sample, which was taken at the hospital.
        Ms. Gillespie was charged with vehicular manslaughter and drunken driving.
        As the women's relatives, neighbors and colleagues learned of the crash yesterday, they were shocked to learn of Ms. Bartichek's death and that Ms. Gillespie was being held responsible for it.
        Ms. Bartichek's son, Brian Bartichek, 47, said his mother, who was known as Peggy, was independent, feisty, and had survived many ordeals.
        ''She's beaten five cancers,'' he said. ''She's a strong lady, so for this to happen, it's a shock.'' She had been a widow since 1991, he said.
        He stood yesterday outside his mother's two-story brick row house on Eliot Avenue in Middle Village, decorated with wreaths and garland for the holiday. ''I don't know why she was going down the wrong way,'' he said, referring to Ms. Gillespie. ''It could have happened to anybody.''
        Representative Crowley, who lives in Woodside, said Ms. Bartichek was a ''dear personal friend,'' who had worked for him for 18 years in the State Assembly and in Congress and had attended his wedding and the baptisms of his children. She retired last year.
        ''Everyone knew her,'' a neighbor, Nancy Goldbach, said about Ms. Bartichek. ''She always had a smile and a kind word for everyone.''
        She was ''gorgeous,'' Ms. Goldbach added, and ''always impeccably dressed.''
        Mr. Crowley's chief of staff, Chris McCannell, said in Washington that both Ms. Bartichek and Ms. Gillespie, who still works for the representative, assisted constituents who contacted his office.
        Mr. Crowley said that Ms. Gillespie was a current employee. Her neighbors said she worked two days a week, after retiring several years ago. They did not know what her previous job was.
        They also said she had two sons and was divorced, but remained on good terms with her ex-husband. He is ill, and she visited him in the hospital frequently, the neighbors said.
        Ms. Gillespie's tidy ranch house, dark last night like Ms. Bartichek's, just a few blocks away, was also decorated for Christmas. On her front lawn, she had built a small Japanese garden with small lamps and stones carved with the words, ''longevity,'' ''prosperity'' and ''happy.''
        One neighbor said that Ms. Gillespie bought the Honda about a year ago and that when she first acquired it, it took her four or five tries at parallel parking before she was able to fit into a spot. But she soon mastered the skill.
        ''She started doing it in one shot,'' said the neighbor, who did not want to be identified. Then she would wave her arms and ''she'd say, 'I made it.' ''
        Helen Yan, 50, rode up to Ms. Bartichek's home on her bicycle yesterday planning to clean her home, as she did regularly. ''If Peggy wants to go somewhere, she always picks her up,'' Ms. Yan said, referring to Ms. Gillespie. ''She always says, 'My friend is driving. My friend is driving.' She was lucky. Peggy was unlucky.''
      