
        The City Council is expected to vote this week on a generous if arcane section of the property tax code known as 421-a. It's about time. The law reduces property taxes for developers of apartment buildings in the city for as long as 25 years. It was born during the citywide depression of the 1970s to encourage construction, but that admirable rationale is no longer valid. Construction is booming, and while New York will certainly need new housing to accommodate a growing population, what it needs most of all is housing that people can afford. The law needs to be re-tailored to reflect that need.
        There are basically three proposals on the table. Despite differences in scope, all three proposals would revise a section of 421-a that requires developers in the hottest parts of town -- so-called exclusion zones -- to make 20 percent of their housing affordable to low-income people if they want the tax break. The exclusion zones are now largely confined to parts of Manhattan south of Harlem and parts of the Brooklyn waterfront.
        Mayor Michael Bloomberg, who got the reform ball rolling, has one bill. It would modestly expand the exclusion zones and make other changes, including capping the tax break for apartments with a value over $1 million. A much more aggressive bill sponsored by two council members -- Annabel Palma of the Bronx and David Yassky of Brooklyn-- would effectively make the entire city an exclusion zone. That proposal frightens smaller developers and lenders who believe that requiring everyone everywhere in the city to provide housing for low-income residents would make it uneconomical to build housing for moderate-income people, who are also being increasingly frozen out of the market.
        The third proposal, from Christine Quinn, the Council speaker, sits somewhere in the middle. Her proposal, which Mr. Bloomberg now supports, would double the exclusion zones in the mayor's bill, cap the tax break for higher-priced housing at about $650,000, maximize reinvestment in city-created affordable housing and require regular reviews of the program.
        Although her bill might well be improved by the healthy debate now taking place in the council, it is more generous than the mayor's original proposal and more flexible -- and less threatening to the overall market -- than the Palma-Yassky proposal.
        The current law expires at the end of 2007, but any reform bill will need approval in Albany, which could take a year. Whatever their differences, the 51 members of the council have an obligation to move quickly to update a law that confers undeserved benefits on developers of high-end housing while doing less and less for people who can barely afford to live here in the first place.
        The City
      