
        THERE are official and unofficial lists summarizing the demonic, if thus far nonfatal, outbreak of illness that has obsessed Dr. Patricia Dillon, Suffolk County's director of communicable disease and acting director of public health, over the past two weeks. There's nothing like the threat of a food-borne plague -- paranoia about contaminated food being an occupational hazard -- to drive a public health official into a martial mode.
        The enemy? An insidious bacterium whose natural habitat is the feces of hoofed animals. Unfortunately, it is developing a habit of sneaking into the human food chain via vegetables. Dr. Dillon is caught up in the mystery of this antipublic-health trend.
        ''I'm a lot like Forrest Gump,'' she says of her uncanny ability to wind up in momentous situations. She served as student intern to C. Everett Koop, the surgeon general, as he battled tobacco companies over the damage wrought by secondhand smoke, and huddled with the first lady, Nancy Reagan, to debate condom distribution. After the Challenger explosion, she took another timeout from Dartmouth Medical School to do research with NASA's medical team. She planned a Bioterrorism Preparedness Program for Suffolk County in 2001. Now she is trying to protect her constituency of 1.4 million from exposure to E. coli in tainted lettuce. Tricky.
        One serious, one silly, the lists in her office share a generally unmentionable theme that Dr. Dillon, a sprite of 45 with a receding halo of Orphan Annie-ish curls and a vibrant temperament, blurts out with no embarrassment whatsoever.
        ''Chasing down bloody diarrhea, that's what we do around here,'' she announces at full volume, briskly guiding a visitor through the maze of the health services complex. Some of her co-workers are cringing, but not Dr. Dillon, a chronic overachiever (she skipped her senior year of high school, attended community college, and borrowed $100,000 to get through medical school) with Mohawk bloodlines on her mother's side and an eccentric father who converted an upstate silo into their home.
        Despite having what she calls ''a surgical personality'' -- brash, bold, and result-oriented -- Dr. Dillon decided to focus on preventive medicine after a bad night in the emergency room at Mercy Hospital in Rockville Centre. ''It was Christmas Eve, a 12-year-old boy went to the movies at a mall in Nassau County where a gang fight broke out, got caught in the crossfire and had the back of his head blown off,'' she recalls. She tried to stabilize him; he died. ''I decided I wanted to go into disease prevention instead of being somebody who picks up the pieces after the fact.'' So here she is.
        ONE of the two E. coli lists, posted on an office bulletin board, provides a statistical update on the vexing outbreak initially linked to a Taco Bell outpost in Riverhead and replicated at three other Taco Bells in Suffolk.
        Trouble in the doctor's own restaurant row, as it were. Has she ever wolfed down Taco Bell burritos? Affirmative. Is she worried that the 11 confirmed cases of E. coli poisoning that her department has documented since Dec. 1 (the norm for the county is a dozen per year) may not be the last? She is.
        ''My biggest fear is that this is something we might be seeing all over the nation, coming from a food source that young children have access to,'' she says, ''and if you give a whopping dose of this stuff to a child, oh yes, it does kill them.''
        Two of the 11 Suffolk cases involved two boys who suffered temporary renal failure. Another probable E. coli diagnosis awaits lab confirmation. More than 100 possible cases have been phoned into the department. Only half of the 108 employees at the four restaurants have been tested.
        By Tuesday, there were enough sick Taco Bell customers in enough states -- four -- that Dr. Dillon, during a conference call, implored the Food and Drug Administration to take over the investigation.
        ''Theoretically, it became clear to us that fresh produce was our primary problem, and that this food was coming into the restaurants already contaminated, which meant it needed to be handled at the federal level,'' she explains. ''This is not a Suffolk County problem; this is bigger than us. I do trust the F.D.A., but the trail is starting to get cold.'' And Taco Bells are open for business again.
        Dr. Dillon admits to craving soft tacos. So does this mean that Taco Bell is a safe fast-food bet? ''I can't guarantee any place is safe,'' she says. Not even her kitchen in Huntington, where the cook in residence is her husband, Richard, a retired NYC firefighter.
        The second list, which is taped to Dr. Dillon's office door, is a reprint of a recent David Letterman gag: Top 10 Questions to Ask Yourself Before Eating at Taco Bell. ''Will the hot sauce kill the bacteria?'' is a particular favorite.
        Hamburger meat is a habitual offender. But this E. coli was first traced to green onions. Now the FDA suspects shredded lettuce. This suspicion, following the E. coli outbreak linked to contaminated spinach this fall, does not bode well for the repute of fresh foods.
        ''The healthier we try to eat, the more we get in trouble,'' Dr. Dillon says. ''Maybe the end result of all this will be to trigger more protections and regulations in the way that fresh foods are handled and processed. The only good part of this on a personal level is that my husband realizes I'm not neurotic, I'm right.''
        Right about everything? ''No, about rinsing your food before you eat it. It's hard to cook your salad!'' And neurotic.
        PUBLIC LIVES
      