
        AFTER Enron and then WorldCom foundered amid multibillion-dollar accounting scandals, exposing layers of corporate malfeasance that are still coming to light now, Washington moved belatedly but forcefully to stiffen regulations, toughen enforcement and improve corporate audits.
        The goal was to shore up confidence in Wall Street, particularly among individual investors who had been pushed more than ever into the stock and bond markets by the decline of company pension and health-insurance plans, along with soaring college costs. Tales from thousands of investors who lost their life savings were a powerful indictment of lax government oversight.
        Is the pendulum swinging back, to less federal oversight and more self regulation?
        The question arises because prosecutors and regulators in Washington took steps last week -- almost exactly five years after Enron filed for bankruptcy -- to roll back some of the tough new measures adopted in that first blush of scandal.
        The Justice Department started by saying it would restrict prosecutors in corporate corruption cases. The Securities and Exchange Commission followed a day later by proposing looser auditing standards for thousands of smaller public companies.
        The timing was somewhat jarring. Fannie Mae, the nation's largest mortgage finance company, was suing its auditors last week for claiming they were negligent in helping to prepare financial statements that led to a $6.3 billion restatement of earnings, and The Wall Street Journal was uncovering a new scandal involving the improper back-dating of executive stock options.
        Some investor groups and outside experts criticized the proposals, saying they open loopholes in the law that unscrupulous companies are likely to exploit, effectively defanging the post-Enron changes. But others said that the adjustments by the Justice Department and the commission did not represent a wholesale retreat.
        Indeed, they suggested that the changes announced last week could actually benefit small investors by taking pressure off the new Congress to go much further in rolling back the post-Enron rules, as the United States Chamber of Commerce and other groups advocate. They are seeking to curtail shareholder lawsuits and cap the liability of accounting firms.
        ''We still are living under the shadow of Enron and WorldCom and that has tempered the business community's attempts at more precipitous action,'' said Joel Seligman, a securities law expert and authority on the history of the S.E.C. who is also the president of the University of Rochester.
        Mr. Seligman and others also said that the commission's action on small companies, an interpretation of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, was an appropriate trimming of a rule that was being applied to excess. That section requires public companies to assess their internal financial controls, a process that became a lightening rod for criticism because of its costs.
        The Sarbanes-Oxley law was approved in 2002 as lawmakers grew concerned that they might be swept out of office by millions of middle- and lower-income investors who owned their share of the marketplace through mutual funds, I.R.A.'s, 401 (k)'s, and 529 college-savings programs.
        Since then, as the scandals and trials have receded to the back pages, investors have poured even more money into the markets and a new and deregulatory-minded mood has taken hold in Washington. This Thursday, that movement will be on full display in a federal district court here, where a judge will consider a case that challenges the validity of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, a new agency created by the Sarbanes-Oxley law to oversee auditors.
        Some business groups, as well as the treasury secretary, Henry M. Paulson, have raised concerns that more companies are listing their stock overseas because of the regulatory climate in the United States.
        Last month, a committee of academics and businessmen headed by R. Glenn Hubbard, the former chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers and now dean of the Columbia Business School, and John L. Thornton, a former president and co-chief operating officer of the Goldman Sachs Group and the current chairman of the Brookings Institution, proposed a series of measures they said would address this problem. The remedies include protecting corporations from criminal and civil cases, imposing new restrictions on shareholder lawsuits, and capping the liability of accounting firms.
        AT the core of critics' arguments is the idea that American laws make foreign markets more attractive than domestic ones.
        But some experts discount that link and point to other reasons why more companies are seeking out foreign markets. Listing and underwriting fees are significantly lower in many countries, and a number of companies that have recently listed in Europe and elsewhere overseas would never have met the disclosure or financial standards of American markets, even with the latest changes.
        ''You can reduce American regulations to zero and overseas markets would still be attractive to some companies,'' said Richard C. Breeden, a former chairman of the S.E.C. ''The proportion of offerings in the United States is going down. But India is getting richer and China is getting richer, and these trends reflect that.''
        Wall Street firms like Goldman Sachs are also posting record earnings, Mr. Breeden added, a sign that American underwriters have not suffered.
        Barbara Roper, director of investor protection at the Consumer Federation of America, said it was also incorrect to blame shareholder lawsuits for the growing appeal of foreign markets, or to assert that such litigation has been unduly burdensome.
        The number of securities lawsuits has steadily and dramatically declined in recent years, Ms. Roper said, with a 45 percent drop in the first six months of this year. On an annualized basis, she added, the number of cases are at the lowest level in 10 years.
        Ms. Roper attributed the trend to better corporate governance and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Moreover, only five shareholder lawsuits cited accounting firms in 2005; in the first half of this year, only one.
        Other experts said that last week's actions could represent the high water mark for the retrenchment.
        ''Given the significant amount of change that took place, I'm not surprised that there is this counterrevolution,'' said Charles M. Elson, director of the John L. Weinberg Center for Corporate Governance at the University of Delaware. ''What is significant is that there is no attempt here to throw the piano out the window. What we are seeing instead is simply a movement of the furniture around the room. The changes being made are really at the margins and there remains a broad consensus that the bigger changes that were made were reasonable ones.''
        THE NATION
      