
        WE set out on our wild boar chase about half past three on a Saturday afternoon, cutting through a wheat field in a beat-up Dodge pickup. The tires crunched the gravel road, and the worn-out shocks bounced the crowns of our hats against the roof of the cab. In the pasture up ahead, we saw a nice-size herd of Black Angus, a cow and calf operation, grazing in the low November sun.
        I was hunkered in the front seat of the pickup clutching a 6-millimeter Remington rifle that belonged to my buddy Crockett; he was in the back seat cradling his .30-30. A 22-year-old hunting guide named T. J. crouched over the steering wheel, chewing tobacco. We were deep in the heart of my home state of Texas, not far from President Bush's ranch, and we were on an executive pursuit that felt like a murderous mission from God.
        Now before I go any further, I need to say that I've disguised the identities of the main characters in this story for reasons soon to become obvious. I was referred to T. J.'s boss by the proprietor of an Internet site specializing in wild boar hunting. I'd told the boss man on the phone that I aimed to write a column about the hunt. So I guess he figured Crockett and I were New Yorkers. He said he couldn't come with us because it was his son's birthday, so he'd send T. J.
        ''Wild pigs cause more destruction than any other predator,'' T. J. declared, rolling down the window of the truck. He spit out a wad of tobacco, and added, ''But they're not stupid animals.''
        I knew from my wild boar due diligence that T. J. wasn't exaggerating. A recent study by Texas A&M University researchers found that wild swine were a ''major management problem'' in Texas and 18 other states. They prey on other wildlife like birds, fish, snakes, frogs, goats and sheep. Each year, they destroy millions of dollars worth of crops and agricultural operations with their digging and rooting. They are also suspected of helping to spread last summer's E. coli outbreak in California spinach fields.
        Texas is suffering a wild pig population explosion. According to the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, there are more than 1.5 million of them, and they inhabit almost all 254 counties, rural and urban alike. Austin's mayor, Will Wynn, said in an interview that wild swine were ''the single most invasive force'' in the local ecosystem, which includes 27,000 acres of city-owned natural habitats for rare and endangered species.
        ''We hire snipers to shoot hogs, but we still can't keep up,'' Mr. Wynn complained. ''I was thinking of running an ad in The New York Times saying that we need people who 'Have Gun, Will Travel.' ''
        T. J. turned the Dodge pickup into a plot of land covered with mesquite trees and teeming with more Black Angus. The mesquite plot backed up to a creek secluded by thick underbrush. A steel drum feeding can perched on wooden stilts in a clearing in front of the creek. T. J. set up a four-foot-square camouflage tent about 50 yards from the feeding can. I crawled inside with the 6 millimeter, and he zipped up the back.
        ''Try not to shoot a cow,'' T. J. whispered.
        T. J. led Crockett to another feeding can nearby, and set up a second tent. Then he drove off in the pickup, leaving my buddy and me alone in our hunting blinds.
        I stared out through the narrow slits of my tent. A Black Angus cow stared back at me, and mooed. I glanced down at some brown clumps on the ground inside the tent; T. J. had pitched the tent on a pile of cow patties.
        Like the young protagonist in the opening pages of William Faulkner's ''The Bear,'' I suddenly felt another unseen presence nearby. But I had no idea whether it was a wild boar or something even darker.
        I peered out at a mesquite tree; its leaves glistened like golden chevrons in the afternoon light. The presence of once domesticated feral pigs in Texas traced back to their arrival with 17th-century Spanish explorers. In the 1930s, ranchers imported Russian boars for sport hunting. Many of the Russian boars escaped, and began cross breeding with fugitive feral pigs.
        I clutched the 6 millimeter, feeling more vulnerable with each passing second. Although there were almost no pure bred Russian boars left, many modern wild swine retained their sharp tusks and armorlike hides. An average hog weighed more than 200 pounds; a local hunter had bagged a 600-pounder.
        I fancied that the situation boiled down to me killing and eating a hog before it had a chance to do the same to me. In fact, hogs had become a prized delicacy. Texas slaughterhouses exported pig meat to Europe and gourmet vendors in the northeastern United States, who, in turn, supplied restaurateurs like my wife. I'd sampled wild boar several times; they were leaner and tastier than pen-raised hogs, especially if slow cooked for several hours.
        As the sun sank behind the underbrush, Crockett and I exchanged cellphone text messages. Our feeding cans were supposed to drop bait for the hogs at 4:45 p.m., but neither of them did. It got pitch dark around 6 p.m. But the lights on our feeding cans failed to turn on, so we couldn't even see if our nocturnal prey were out there.
        I phoned T. J., and he promised to pick us up ''shortly.'' In the meantime, I heard dogs yelping nearby. ''They're coyotes,'' Crockett informed me in a text message. ''And they'll get you.''
        Terrified, I fired the 6 millimeter through one of the slits in my tent. The retort shut up the coyotes, but it didn't flush out any wild pigs. Crockett and I spent another 90 minutes shivering in the darkness.
        When T. J. finally returned, he went to examine the feed cans. He said that it looked like raccoons had chewed through the electrical wires. When I asked what had taken him so long to pick us up, he claimed he had to go get gas.
        As we drove back to his boss's ranch. T. J. volunteered that he couldn't live in a city like New York. ''Being around all those people would make me go berserk,'' he confided, ''like those guys that shoot up post offices.''
        By the time we pulled up next to my rented car, Crockett had gone from freezing cold to boiling mad. He'd learned to shoot up in the Panhandle at the age of 4, and he told T. J. this was the worst hunt he'd been on in 45 years. He sent T. J. to fetch his boss.
        Moments later, the boss man came running out of the house in camouflage long johns. He looked to be 45 to 55 years old, and he was cussing and screaming. ''I'm tired of baby-sitting you New Yorkers,'' he hollered. ''Go get my shotgun, T. J.''
        The boss man leaned over the passenger side window of my rented car. ''You better pay me $300 right now,'' he growled, ''or I'll hold you face down on the road at gunpoint until the sheriff gets here.''
        Crockett frowned hard, and then handed over a stack of 20s. The boss man counted the bills. Then he cursed us again and told us to get off his property.
        I floored the accelerator and drove as fast as I could until we were safely out of shotgun range.
        The next day, I phoned the proprietor of the Internet site who referred me to T. J.'s boss. He said mine was the second complaint he'd gotten in the last week. Crockett reckoned that the boss man must have spent our $300 on his son's birthday before we even got there, which was why he needed it so bad. Crockett still lamented the fact that we hadn't even seen a wild boar. I allowed that we'd seen more than enough.
        EXECUTIVE PURSUITS E-mail: pursuits@nytimes.com
      