
        SHANNON LARKIN is a gifted and versatile athlete, a standout at any sport she has tried. But Shannon, a 12-year-old seventh grader from Burlington, Conn., will not be scoring baskets, running track, hitting softballs or playing field hockey this year.
        That might interfere with her aim: to be the best soccer player possible, and to make the Olympic team. And that, she figures, can be accomplished only with hard work and an unwavering focus on her favorite sport.
        So Shannon made up her mind to specialize in soccer, and all other sports are out. Between her middle school team, soccer clinics and camps, and her games for -- and practices with -- the Connecticut Football Club Wolves, an elite team from the area, there is no time for anything else.
        ''This is the way she wants to do it,'' said Rich Larkin, Shannon's father. ''Soccer is what she loves to do. We give her every opportunity to play as much as possible. We encourage her but never told her she had to do this. She just has an internal competitiveness that drives her.''
        Shannon's talents make her unusual, but there is nothing unusual about her situation. A growing number of coaches, parents and children believe that the best way to produce superior young athletes is to have them play only one sport from an early age, and to play it virtually year-round. Some youth sports experts say it is an attitude that has trickled down from high school, where specialization in sports has been more prevalent for years.
        ''Forget about just high school, specialization has crept into youth sports,'' said Pat McInally, a former punter for the Cincinnati Bengals and the author of ''Moms and Dads, Kids and Sports'' (Scribner, 1988). ''If you are a good athlete in a sport like basketball, you'll be involved in a 9- or 10-month program, you'll practice twice a week, and you'll have tournaments on the weekends.
        ''On the days you don't practice, they're going to expect you to see the shooting coach one day, a defensive specialist the next. That happens at age 10, 11, and it has become what you need to do to compete.''
        Matt Blumel, 15, came to that conclusion four years ago and stopped playing all sports other than basketball. Now a 6-foot sophomore at Rumson-Fair Haven Regional High School in New Jersey, he is intent on playing in college at the highest level, Division I, and knows he will have to work hard to make that a reality. Between practices and games for the high school team and his Amateur Athletic Union team, the Central Jersey Hawks, Matt's basketball season never seems to end.
        ''No, I never get sick of playing basketball,'' he said. ''It's my passion. Some of my friends told me I should go out for the football team, but I don't want to risk getting hurt for basketball. The way I have done this has made me a lot better player. Just having one focus really helps.''
        Not everyone agrees. Specialization has its critics, including those who argue that it is not the best way to create a standout athlete from a physical or mental standpoint and that this is another symptom of youth sports spinning out of control.
        It is not difficult to see a 10-year-old one-sport athlete as the creation of overambitious and pushy coaches and parents who have forgotten that sports are supposed to be about fun. That push can have consequences contrary to what parents may hope for, youth sports experts say.
        ''Even at a young age, I can find the kids not doing it for themselves but for the parents who are pushing them,'' said Steve Coxon, the coaching director for the Connecticut Football Club, which oversees several premier soccer teams, including the C.F.C. Wolves. ''Those are the ones who will burn out. Some kids will play with a smile on their face and play every day of the week and they will love it.
        ''When it gets to the high school age, they have choices to make, like do they want to go out with their friends on a Friday night and socialize or do they want to go to soccer practice? Lots of the kids don't want to put up with the grind. Parents need to keep that in mind.''
        Sometimes, the problem is not with the parents but with the coaches. Some of the experts say it is not uncommon for coaches to pressure a youngster to play only their sport. The pressure can include threats to cut anyone who plays another sport.
        ''You'll see a lot of A.A.U. coaches say to a kid, 'What do you mean you're playing fall baseball?' That's out,'' said Rocky Prosdocimo, an Amateur Athletic Union boys' basketball coach based in South Plainfield, N.J. ''They are putting a ton of pressure on these kids to play their sport and their sport only, and they're doing it with younger and younger kids. I see it happening with 10-year-olds now.''
        For many such coaches, he said, ''it's about them enhancing their own reputations.''
        But even if parents and coaches do not push, and a child adores a sport and wants to play it round-the-clock, there may be reasons to consider a more diverse approach. Jack Hutslar, who runs the North American Youth Sports Institute, a consulting firm in Kernersville, N.C., says that specialization can be physically detrimental.
        ''When specializing in one sport, youngsters use a very narrow range of muscles, so there's an increased likelihood of injury when you are using the same muscles over and over,'' Mr. Hutslar said. ''From a health point of view, it's not good. Kids either need to play multiple sports or take a break.''
        Try telling that to a youngster caught up in the competitive maelstrom of youth sports. Or the youngster's parents.
        The HoopScoop Online is a Web site and, previously, a monthly publication that has for years ranked the nation's top youth basketball talent, and it is widely used by college coaches in their recruiting. The HoopScoop recently began to rank the nation's top fifth-grade players.
        Clark Francis, its editor and publisher, said parents had called him to complain that their child did not make his lists. Many parents are interested in any edge in getting their child one of a limited number of college athletic scholarships.
        Shannon Larkin hopes to be among the few who get one of those scholarships and has set her sights on the University of North Carolina, a perennial women's soccer power. Her father may understand the odds better than his daughter, but he is proud that she is so driven.
        ''As long as that is what she truly wants to do, I have no problem with it,'' Mr. Larkin said. ''I know things get crazy sometimes with these sports. But I've never heard anyone say a thing when a family has their kid practicing and playing the violin all the time. How is this different?''
      