
        THE American trade balance continues to worsen, but there is a positive sign. Over the last 12 months, United States exports of goods have risen at a faster rate than imports, in contrast to the situation for most of the last decade.
        Exports were up 14.3 percent, the fastest growth rate since 1995, while imports climbed 12.4 percent.
        That did not, however, cause the deficit to shrink. The trade figures for October, released this week, showed that the United States had exported a record $1.01 trillion in goods over the previous 12 months. Imports, however, came to $1.84 trillion.
        Given that imbalance, exports would have to rise at nearly twice the rate of imports to reduce the dollar total of the deficit. Instead, the 12-month deficit of $828.7 billion was $76.7 billion more than the deficit for the 12 months through October 2005.
        The last time the annual United States trade deficit declined over a 12-month period was in 2002, in the aftermath of the 2001 recession when both imports and exports were declining on an annual basis.
        The charts show the annual change in exports and imports for the United States both in total and with five countries or groups of countries -- groups that together account for the vast majority of the American trade deficit.
        Measured in terms of growth of exports and imports, the American trade position is improving now with every one of the groups except North America, made up of Canada and Mexico. There, United States exports are up 10.9 percent, while imports grew at a rate of 12.3 percent.
        American exports to China were up 33.4 percent, while imports were up just 17.3 percent -- the slowest rate of gain for imports in four years. But imports from China to the United States are more than five times as large as the flow of goods moving the other way, so the deficit continues to increase. Similarly, American exports to members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries are rising at a more rapid rate than are imports from them -- but the deficit is growing because imports are more than three times as large as exports.
        It was not too many years ago that Japan was the area of most concern to Americans worried about trade deficits. It still accounts for an annual deficit of $87 billion, a tenth of the total, but it provided less than 2 percent of the deterioration in the trade balance since the end of 2000, during the administration of President Bush.
        China, on the other hand, now accounts for 27 percent of the trade deficit and for 36 percent of the deterioration since President Bush took office.
        The OPEC countries have accounted for 15 percent of the deterioration in the trade deficit, but that is less than the contribution from either Europe -- all the way to Russia and some other former Soviet republics -- or from North America.
        The fact that American exports are now rising faster than imports is in part an indication that other parts of the world are showing more economic strength than the United States. Stronger growth in United States consumption could erase even that small success story.
        OFF THE CHARTS
      