
        The poet Alfred Lord Tennyson said ''Cymbeline'' was his favorite among Shakespeare's plays. George Bernard Shaw, on the other hand, found the convoluted unraveling of its final act stale and filled with nothing more than ''infantile joys'': A pair of long-lost brothers suddenly reappears; one villain is transformed into a penitent, and the second, a stepmother-from-hell, conveniently expires in a mad fit; and a wife dutifully and docilely accepts her husband's attempt to have her murdered.
        As I watched the Shakespeare Theater of New Jersey's robust, if ultimately tedious, production of ''Cymbeline,'' the words of my ancient Russian piano teacher, Madame Rosina Lhevinne, came to mind. When I presented her with an obscure Mozart fugue as a candidate for an upcoming recital, she cautioned, ''When a piece is not played, dear, there are good reasons.''
        ''Cymbeline'' is rarely performed, and it is easy to see why. Reading the text, one is immediately struck by the exquisite imagery of some of the verses but stymied by the density of much of the language. Straightforward dialogues turn into impenetrable thickets that no number of explanatory notes can penetrate. I found myself questioning -- along with numerous critics, I might add -- whether the work is totally Shakespeare's or perhaps the product of a collaboration with a lesser talent.
        There are moments of genuine humor provided by a clueless King Cymbeline (Richard Bourg in a guffaw-producing, though occasionally unintelligible, performance) and his vain and boorish stepson, Cloten, (pronounced ''Clotten'' to rhyme with rotten, and played accordingly by a very funny Mark H. Dold). Then, too, there is the dramatic payback of the ferocious Act V battle scenes strikingly choreographed by the director, Joe Discher, and the fight director, Rick Sordelet. Still, ''Cymbeline'' remains a questionable choice for the Shakespeare Theater's December slot.
        Billed as ''sure to entertain all ages,'' this does not really fit the family-friendly label. Some judicious editing, more visual punch and additional musical interludes might have turned this fairy tale of sorts -- wicked stepmother, powerful sleeping potions, a puzzling riddle -- into an audience-pleasing winner. For now we must be content with a rather pedestrian play in a production that neither offends nor exhilarates.
        While the ensemble is generally excellent, some casting decisions could be challenged. Charlotte Parry as Imogen the princess and Derek Wilson as Posthumus Leonatus, her ''poor but worthy'' husband banished by the king as punishment for marrying his daughter, are both gifted actors. As a pair, however, they lack the chemistry and ardor that these two young lovers should exude. Delphi Harrington's evil queen, second wife to Cymbeline, is drawn in such broad strokes that her character is turned into a cartoon.
        On the positive side are the gentle perseverance of Michael Stewart Allen as Pisanio, servant to Posthumus; the dignity and quiet reserve of Mark Elliot Wilson in the role of Belarius, a nobleman banished by the king; and the cavalier loutishness of Robert Gomes playing Iachimo, an ''Italian gentleman'' who is no gentleman but proves capable of repentance.
        ''Cymbeline'' is at the Shakespeare Theater of New Jersey, 36 Madison Avenue, Madison (on the Drew University campus), through Dec. 31; www.shakespeareNJ.org. Information: (973) 408-5600.
        THEATER REVIEW
      