
        In 2000, the State of Connecticut committed $1 billion in development money for Adriaen's Landing, a project here with a convention center, science museum and residential and retail spaces. Two years later, West Hartford, the big town next door, gave enthusiastic backing to Blue Back Square, a $180 million multiuse development with housing, restaurants and stores, without any state subsidies.
        At this point, the smaller investment is much further along. While Blue Back Square is already seen as an important step forward for West Hartford, much of the Hartford project still does not exist.
        Adriaen's Landing, developed by the Capital City Economic Development Authority, a quasipublic agency, was intended to bring life to a city that had struggled for years to attract spending to its downtown, which has suffered decades of decline amid the flight of the middle class to the suburbs and cutbacks by insurance companies, the city's foremost industry.
        The 540,000-square-foot Connecticut Convention Center and a 409-room Marriott Hotel opened in 2005, and work on the Connecticut Center for Science and Exploration has begun. While officials say they are happy with the business generated by the convention center and the hotel so far, there are no upscale restaurants within walking distance of Adriaen's Landing.
        By contrast, Blue Back Square, developed by Street-Works, a White Plains developer, and JDA Development of Cromwell, Conn., is piggybacking on an already successful downtown district, West Hartford Center, that has been revitalized during the last 20 years. In effect, West Hartford, whose population was 61,000 in the middle of 2005, has become a regional destination for dining and shopping, a role that the capital city, with a population twice as large, formerly played.
        Ronald Van Winkle, West Hartford's director of community services, stood on the rooftop of the Town Hall recently and looked over the adjoining development, named for the blue-covered spelling book of Noah Webster, a West Hartford native. ''This creates a real neighborhood, a place to go,'' he said. ''People like me will be able to go to dinner, a movie, the library, and then when we go home, the younger kids will come out to the restaurants.''
        The five buildings of Blue Back Square are either finished or in progress, with a final completion date of November 2007. Each of the five buildings now under construction has a ground floor of shops, totaling 220,000 square feet of retail space. Medical office space will encompass 137,000 square feet, and other professional offices will total another 62,500 square feet. Two 500-space parking garages are already built, and a six-screen Criterion Cinema is planned.
        A year ago, a Whole Foods Market adjacent to the site opened its doors. Although it is not part of the Blue Back development, it has clearly increased the area's attractiveness as a shopping destination. Tenants that have already signed on for Blue Back include Crate & Barrel, REI, Barnes & Noble, the Cheesecake Factory, Fleming's Steakhouse and the National Jean Company.
        By contrast, mounds of dirt now mark the Front Street District, a residential and retail development in Hartford. Progress has been slowed by the departure of two developers and negotiations with a third, the H. B. Nitkin Group of Greenwich, Conn., which has trimmed back the original proposals and has asked to do the project in phases.
        The first phase of the Front Street District, which is being designed by the architect Robert A. M. Stern, will include 115 units of housing, along with 60,000 square feet of commercial space, which would be about 75 percent restaurants and 25 percent stores. No work has started yet, and Bradley Nitkin, the company's president, was not ready to say what retailers had committed to the project.
        The second phase has not been determined, Mr. Nitkin said. The. Nitkin Group will provide about $24 million of the $45 million cost for the first phase, said Michael Cicchetti, the assistant director of the Capital City Economic Development Authority. State and federal grants will provide the rest.
        But the latest plan is a significant retrenchment from that of the previous developers, who had at various times proposed up to 240 luxury apartments, 170,000 square feet of retail and restaurants and a multiscreen movie theater.
        Jerry Collins, the owner of the Arch Street Tavern, a pub that is one of the few places to eat in the vicinity of Front Street, looked wistfully outside his windows on a recent Thursday at the project's dirt piles, his only scenery for months. Mr. Collins's restaurant managed to weather the closing of the access street to the restaurant some months ago (it has since reopened), among many other inconveniences. But he has waited years for his view to change, and he said he was hoping that Mr. Nitkin would be able to get the earth to move again.
        ''Brad's trying,'' Mr. Collins said. ''The market changed on him -- interest rates went up and housing slowed -- and I'm sure he's being careful. It's become the incredible shrinking site.'' Mr. Nitkin estimated that the first phase would be open by the summer of 2008.
        Hartford and retailing have long been a difficult mix. The thousands of workers who flow into Hartford every morning tend to eat there, but do their shopping elsewhere. There is no grocery store downtown, and few thriving retail establishments.
        ''Hartford has a long history of trying to force retail downtown,'' said Richard Heapes, an architect and principal in Street-Works, who also previously worked on the Front Street project when the Manhattan developer Richard Cohen was involved with it.
        ''Ask any mayor of a new growth city, and they'll tell you the way to get viable retail is to get residential down there,'' Mr. Heapes said. ''Slowly, they're adding units downtown, which will add people to the streets, but it is going to have to evolve.''
        SQUARE FEET
      