
        It didn't take the financier George Soros long to declare his 1997 bet on Russia's national telephone company the worst investment of his career.
        In a new twist to the long and fraught history of this investment, an up-and-coming telecommunications company on Tuesday snapped up 25 percent of Svyazinvest for $1.3 billion, signaling the intense interest these days in companies providing services to the growing middle class of Russia.
        Comstar, the telecommunications branch of the Sistema holding company of the billionaire Vladimir P. Yevtushenkov, bought the stake from Leonid Blavatnik and Viktor Vekselberg, who are partners in the Alfa Group, a private equity fund. Alfa bought the shares from Mr. Soros in 2004 for $624 million -- a fraction of the $1.8 billion Mr. Soros and partners paid at a privatization auction in 1997.
        The investors are interested in Svyazinvest's network of copper lines into homes, which can be used not only for telephone service, but broadband Internet as well.
        The Vedomosti business newspaper reported Tuesday that Alfa sold the company to Sistema despite a nominally higher bid from a bank, KIT-Finance, representing an unnamed buyer who offered to pay in Gazprom stock.
        Viktor A. Kurilo, head of investor relations for Comstar, said in a telephone interview that he believed that the bidder was Gazprom, the giant natural gas concern, or a company affiliated with it.
        Comstar already operates a broadband service in Moscow, called Stream, and wants to expand to other regions to provide cable and broadband to a growing middle class.
        Comstar indicated in its prospectus for an initial public offering in London that it would bid for the remaining 75 percent of Svyazinvest, which is owned by the government.
        Sistema also owns companies investing in pay-per-view television and movie production. The strategy is to become a player for content and new media in Russia.
        Svyazinvest holds controlling stakes in most of Russia's dozens of regional phone companies. While regulated phone rates are low, they are rising with the appreciation of the ruble.
        ''This might be one of the best strategic investments we make,'' Mr. Kurilo said, drawing a contrast with what Mr. Soros once called ''the worst investment of my life.''
        Svyazinvest's investment is just the latest twist, as beleaguered assets from Communist Russia become candidates for transformation into sought-after investments. After a series of rigged privatization auctions in the mid-1990s that catapulted a small coterie of hustling businessmen into the upper echelons of the world's rich, Anatoly B. Chubais, then chief of the privatization process, vowed to run a clean auction for the phone company.
        At the time, Mr. Soros won in partnership with the Russian tycoon Vladimir O. Potanin. But within a year, an aide to Mr. Chubais was forced to resign for accepting $100,000 from a Swiss company connected to Mr. Potanin. Mr. Soros later bought out Mr. Potanin.
        Revenue at the company plummeted after the 1998 financial crisis, which forced Mr. Soros to write off $2 billion in Russian investments including the loss in value of the Svyazinvest position.
        Correction:  December 16, 2006, Saturday  An article in Business Day on Wednesday about Comstar, the telecommunications branch of Sistema, which bought 25 percent of Svyazinvest in Russia, referred incorrectly to an equity firm's involvement with the sale and misstated that firm's business relationship to the two investors who sold the stake. The Alfa Group, a private equity firm, was not involved in the transaction. The sellers, Leonid Blavatnik and Viktor Vekselberg, are not partners in the Alfa Group, although they have paired with the group in other business deals. The article also misinterpreted a comment by Viktor A. Kurilo, head of investor relations for Comstar, about a second, unidentified bidder for the company. Mr. Kurilo mentioned Gazprom only as an example of a company that might be interested in buying Comstar; he did not identify Gazprom as the second bidder.
      