
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Talk in Class Turns to God, Setting Off Public Debate on Rights'' (news article, Dec. 18):
        It is discouraging and depressing to read about a Kearny, N.J., teacher, David Paszkiewicz, declaring in his history class that evolution and the Big Bang are not scientific, that dinosaurs were on Noah's ark, that only Christians have a place in heaven and, referring to Jesus, ''if you reject his gift of salvation, then you know where you belong.''
        More discouraging and depressing are the reactions of the school principal and various citizens of Kearny who decry the student who exposed this abuse of trust by a public school teacher.
        Mr. Paszkiewicz may be an excellent teacher, but when he wants to teach his evangelical version of religion, let him confine it to a religious class or church group. It has no place in a public school, let alone a history class.
        As for those citizens of Kearny who apparently condemn the student who protested Mr. Paskiewicz's religious statements in class rather than what is in fact a teacher's proselytizing, perhaps they need to understand the true meaning of separation of church and state as opposed to what they think is an abridgement of First Amendment rights.
        Peter Theil  Washington, Dec. 18, 2006
        To the Editor:
        While public school teachers certainly have freedom of religion in this country, they do not have a right to promote their private religious convictions in the classroom. They are role models in positions of great power and authority over a captive audience, their students.
        They bear a solemn obligation never to abuse this power. Any teacher who would do so has clearly disqualified himself from teaching a class in (of all things!) the United States Constitution. That the Kearny, N.J., teacher may be popular with many students only compounds the offense.
        The apparent insensitivity of the teacher, school, union and local district to these well-established fundamental principles is astonishing and deeply disturbing.
        David E. Schafer  Hamden, Conn., Dec. 18, 2006
        The writer is president of a humanist organization affiliated with the Unitarian Universalist Association of Congregations.
        To the Editor:
        People cited violation of the First Amendment when a New Jersey schoolteacher asserted that evolution and the Big Bang are not scientific and that Noah's ark carried dinosaurs.
        This case is not about the need to separate church and state; it's about the need to separate ignorant, scientifically illiterate people from the ranks of teachers.
        Neil deGrasse Tyson  New York, Dec. 19, 2006
        The writer, an astrophysicist, is director of the Hayden Planetarium.
      