
        IF you're not finding enough bargains at the mall, there may be some in the stock market.
        As the year draws to a close, many investors drop losing stocks from their portfolios to offset taxable gains on sales of other shares. Tax-loss selling can make an already feeble performer even weaker.
        In many cases, said John Buckingham, a fund manager and editor of The Prudent Speculator newsletter, the losses were overdone in the first place or not justified by corporate developments, so the exacerbated selling can allow investors to buy good stocks at very low prices.
        Mr. Buckingham likes to fill his portfolios with stocks that meet three criteria: they are cheap, have strong balance sheets and are in promising businesses. When these stocks are hit by tax-loss selling, he said, it is possible to own pieces of companies with so much cash on their books that their other assets cost next to nothing.
        He recommended 10 stocks that have been sold heavily lately, which he said could leave them ripe for a smart rebound in the new year. They include three businesses tied to the construction industry, Cavalier Homes, Chromcraft Revington and Smith-Midland; and five technology companies, Dot Hill Systems, InfoSonics, Orbit International, SigmaTel and Wireless Facilities. The two others are Wellman, a producer of packaging materials, and the Lenox Group, which is in the giftware business.
        Mr. Buckingham highlighted SigmaTel and Dot Hill as prime examples of what he calls his ''cash-is-king theme.'' SigmaTel trades at $4.12 a share, with no debt and $2.70 a share in cash. The stock hasn't recovered from Apple Computer's decision last year to drop it as a supplier of semiconductor chips for iPods.
        Dot Hill Systems has had a rocky relationship with the largest customer for its storage systems, Sun Microsystems, which has chosen a different supplier for newer generations of Sun products, Mr. Buckingham said. But the $2.41 in cash a share on its books is a big portion of its share price of $3.72, he noted, so ''you're not paying much for the actual business.''
        The big cash balances provide a cushion for these companies, he said. ''These are names that we would be buying in any event,'' Mr. Buckingham said. Their appeal goes up, he said, ''if we can add in the possibility of a rebound from the ceasing of tax-loss selling.''
        DATA WATCH -- Some evidence of a rebound in housing is expected on Tuesday when data on building permits and housing starts in November is released. A Bloomberg News poll forecasts an increase in the annual rate of housing starts to 1.540 million units from 1.486 million, but a fall in permits to a rate of 1.545 million units from 1.553 million. A report on Friday is expected to show that Americans made and spent more in November. The Bloomberg survey anticipates increases of 0.4 percent in personal income and 0.5 percent in personal spending. The core personal consumption expenditures deflator is estimated to have risen 0.2 percent in the month.
        MARKET WEEK
      