
        The Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas, on Monday renewed his call for new elections, while factional fighting broke out again in the Gaza Strip despite a cease-fire agreement.
        Mr. Abbas, the leader of the Fatah movement, made his remarks in the West Bank city of Ramallah while standing alongside the supportive British prime minister, Tony Blair.
        But Hamas, the militant Islamic faction that controls most of the government after having won elections in January, adamantly opposes a new election. And the truce, announced late Sunday night, did not prevent a new round of shootings and kidnappings.
        The cease-fire did keep most gunmen off the streets in Gaza for most of Monday, though rival branches of the security forces waged one firefight in Gaza City, wounding a teenage bystander.
        After nightfall, a former cabinet minister from Fatah, Sufian Abu Zaida, was briefly kidnapped and forced into a car in northern Gaza, Fatah officials said. He was released unharmed a short while later, but another Fatah man was seized.
        Meanwhile, Fatah members kidnapped a Hamas leader, Imad Deeb, in northern Gaza on Monday, Hamas said. Several other Hamas members were seized a day earlier. Late Monday, all of those held had been freed, Reuters reported, citing officials from both sides.
        A Fatah loyalist was shot dead and several people were wounded Monday evening during a gun battle between the factions in the Jabaliya refugee camp, near Gaza City, Fatah officials said.
        Mr. Abbas, seeking to break months of political deadlock between Fatah and Hamas, called Saturday for new elections. Hamas says Mr. Abbas has no such authority and is describing his move as an attempted coup.
        ''It is clear that we are going for early presidential and legislative elections,'' Mr. Abbas said Monday. ''Nothing stands against that. We are a democratic people, so let's go to the people.''
        He also called for talks with Israel's prime minister, Ehud Olmert. ''We need each other, and we have to deal with our problems,'' said Mr. Abbas, who is widely known as Abu Mazen.
        Mr. Olmert met with Mr. Blair in Jerusalem on Monday evening and later said that he was preparing for talks with Mr. Abbas. But the two leaders have been talking about such a meeting for most of the year, and their only face-to-face encounter was a brief discussion in June on the sidelines of a conference in Jordan.
        In Gaza, Hamas officials reiterated their opposition to a new election, and contended that most other Palestinian factions sided with Hamas.
        ''If all these groups reject the proposal, brother Abu Mazen should respond to the will of the street,'' said Said Siam, the Palestinian interior minister and a Hamas member. ''We have popular support,'' he added, referring to Hamas. ''We favor a dialogue with all parties as the basis for national reconciliation.''
        Mr. Siam, who is responsible for several branches of the Palestinian security forces, went on to blame Fatah for the lawlessness in the Palestinian areas.
        When Hamas came to power, taking over from Fatah, it inherited security forces widely viewed as corrupt and incompetent. Those forces were loyal to Fatah, and Fatah leaders, including Mr. Abbas, did little or nothing to help with the transition, Mr. Siam said.
        As a result, the Hamas government established its own security force, he said. That body, the Executive Force, is made up mostly of Hamas militants, though it also has some Fatah members. It has clashed on numerous occasions with security agencies aligned with Fatah.
        Mr. Blair gave his backing to Mr. Abbas, and did not meet with Hamas officials. ''I believe what is important following your speech is that the international community mobilize its efforts to support you in your office,'' Mr. Blair said.
        While Western countries have refused to provide assistance to the Hamas government, the Europeans in particular have been giving money through Mr. Abbas's office.
        ''If the international community really means what it says about supporting people who share the vision of a two-state solution, who are moderate, who are prepared to shoulder their responsibilities, then now is the time for the international community to respond,'' Mr. Blair said.
        Also on Monday, the chief of Israel's Mossad intelligence agency, Meir Dagan, told a parliamentary committee that he believed that Iran would acquire a nuclear bomb by 2009 or 2010, the Israeli news media reported.
        Other Israeli officials have made similar comments recently. They say Iran hopes to master the uranium enrichment process sometime next year.
        Then Iran would need about one year more to make enough weapons-grade uranium for one nuclear bomb, and another year would be required to construct a weapon, the officials say.
        Iran insists it wants only to develop civilian nuclear power.
      