
        Valassis Communications, the largest provider of newspaper inserts, and Advo, the direct-mail marketer, settled their differences Tuesday and agreed to compete a merger first announced in July.
        The two companies came to terms after the board of Advo agreed late Monday to drop its asking price to $33 a share from $37, and Valassis acknowledged that it had found no evidence to support its claim of having been defrauded by Advo.
        In September, Valassis, based in Livonia, Mich., filed suit in the Delaware Chancery Court, seeking to back out of its agreement to buy Advo for $1.3 billion and claiming the company had misrepresented its financial results in the second quarter.
        Advo of Windsor, Conn., known for its ''Have You Seen Me?'' postcard campaign to locate missing children, countersued, asking the court to enforce the merger.
        The trial, which began last week, had been closely watched by arbitragers who packed the courtroom of Vice Chancellor Leo E. Strine Jr. last week.
        An analyst at Lehman Brothers, Evren Ergin, said in October that Valassis faced an uphill battle in trying to get out of the merger with a claim that it had relied on Advo's misrepresentations of its finances.
        A lawyer who monitored the trial, Andrew H. Lippstone, of Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney, recalled that in 2001, Judge Strine rejected a similar claim by the meat processor Tyson Foods when it tried to get out of a merger with Iowa Beef Processors.
        Mr. Lippstone said many of the arbitragers attending the trial appeared to represent funds hoping to take a ''significant short-term position to capitalize on the expected fluctuations caused by the litigation.''
        A professor at Widener University Law School, Lawrence A. Hamermesh, a former corporate litigator, said, ''I've always thought that cases like this settle for good practical reasons.''
        If the buyer can achieve any price break by doing a settlement ''especially if it addresses their economic concerns about the seller, then they are just that much better off,'' Professor Hamermesh said.
        ''From the seller's side, a settlement enables them to keep a bird in the hand,'' he said, ''and salvage some deal rather than run the risk of losing the case and being damaged goods that nobody wants anymore.''
        The lawyer for Advo, Eric M. Roth, of Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz, said there had been settlement discussions before the trial began but the ''momentum picked up over the weekend.''
        The trial was recessed Monday to allow the talks to continue.
        Mr. Roth said Advo was drafting a proxy seeking shareholder approval of the amended merger, now valued at $1.2 billion, which includes Advo's $125 million in long-term debt.
        The companies said the merger was expected to close in the first quarter.
        A person familiar with the transaction said that Valassis had until Feb. 28 to close the deal or two business days after Advo shareholders approve it, whichever comes later.
        The chairman of Valassis, Alan F. Schultz, said in a joint statement with Advo, ''We are pleased to have reached this amended agreement with Advo and put the litigation behind us.''
        The chief executive of Advo, S. Scott Harding, said, ''We look forward to focusing our energy on creating value through combining and growing our businesses.''
        The combined company will create the largest media services provider in the United States, serving 20,000 advertisers worldwide, including 94 of the top 100, the companies said.
        ADVERTISING
      