
        Alarmed by a one-day plunge of about 15 percent in the country's stock market Tuesday, the Thai government stepped in to reverse some capital controls imposed a day earlier by the country's central bank.
        Investors across the region had criticized the controls as a weak attempt at halting a sharp rise in the Thai currency, the baht. After benchmark indexes in Malaysia and Singapore dropped on Tuesday by roughly 2 percent, whole those in India fell 2.5 percent and Indonesia posted an almost 3 percent decline, Finance Minister Pridiyathorn Devakula announced that the military-appointed Thai government would revise a rule imposed Monday that effectively taxed short-term foreign investment.
        ''This was not a mistake,'' Mr. Pridiyathorn said after the market closed Tuesday, in an attempt to defend the original decrees. ''Measures always have side effects. Once we knew the side effects, we quickly fixed it.''
        The sudden market turmoil on Tuesday in Southeast Asia seemed to echo the 1997 currency crisis, when a devaluation by Thailand's central bank prompted panicky sell-offs of currencies, ultimately resulting in an economic setback across Asia.
        The main difference Tuesday was that rather than trying to stop a plunge in the baht, Thailand was acting instead to stop sharp increases in its currency. The baht hit a nine-year high against the dollar Monday, topping off a rise of 16 percent this year.
        The controls that Bangkok employed were intended to push the currency down by dissuading foreigners from buying baht. Governments across Asia are grappling with a dollar that is rapidly declining against their currencies. This phenomenon raises the price of Asian exports for consumers in the United States and other dollar-based economies.
        Thailand has suffered the most in Asia in that regard. ''What Thailand is doing is, in a way, a precursor to what others might be contemplating but in their own cost-benefit analysis don't yet have the guts to do,'' said Venkatraman Anantha-Nageswaran, an economist at Bank Julius Baer in Singapore.
        The concern among policy makers in Southeast Asia is that, as they learned during the 1997 financial crisis, foreign funds can flow out as quickly as they flow in, devastating financial markets in their wake. The capital controls, similar to ones adopted and eventually rescinded by Malaysia in the 1990s, were announced Monday by the newly appointed central bank governor, Tarisa Watanagase.
        Foreign investors were required by Monday's decree to put 30 percent of incoming funds in reserve for one year. The reserve funds would not earn interest and would be subject to a 10 percent tax if the money was withdrawn before one year.
        After the market shock Tuesday, Mr. Pridiyathorn consulted with brokers, investors and representatives of foreign banks and announced that the reserve requirement would no longer apply to stocks. The rule remains in place for bonds and commercial paper.
        Investors lost more than $20 billion in paper wealth Tuesday when stocks in Thailand suffered their largest drop in over a decade. They were particularly angered by Mr. Pridiyathorn's comment late Tuesday that ''just one day of stocks falling is not considered much damage.''
        ''He was far too nonchalant,'' said Korn Chatikavanij, a former president of the Thai arm of J. P. Morgan Chase who is deputy secretary general of the Democrat Party. ''Genuine damage was caused today that needs to be acknowledged.''
        Outside Thailand there are no signs that other central bankers will impose similar capital controls. Central bank officials in Indonesia and South Korea said Tuesday that they did not consider any policy changes necessary. Malaysia specifically ruled out such controls.
        The Bank of Thailand may well have done the job for them, economists said. Analysts said that with the year-end holidays approaching, investors were typically on the lookout for any news that would justify selling their positions and closing the books.
        The Bank of Thailand may therefore have inadvertently provided the pinprick to a six-month rally in emerging Asian markets that has been pushing stocks and currencies to record highs since May, when fears of rising United States interest rates brought an abrupt halt to the previous appetite for Asian equity.
        ''The liquidity has not died away,'' said Amy Auster, a regional economist at ANZ Bank in Melbourne, Australia. ''We are in an environment with a strong risk appetite, and that will favor Asia.''
        According to data compiled by Nomura, roughly $2.8 billion has poured into Thailand's stock market from overseas this year despite political turmoil that culminated in the September coup. Likewise, equity investors have plowed more than $1 billion into the Philippines, $1.78 billion into Indonesia and $8.3 billion into India.
      