
        AN era in advertising will end Dec. 31 when Edward H. Meyer -- known as the Rupert Murdoch or Sumner Redstone of Madison Avenue -- plans to do something that neither media mogul has done: retire.
        For 36 years, Mr. Meyer, who is 79, has led the worldwide agency now known as the Grey Global Group. When he sold it last year to the WPP Group for $1.75 billion, his payday was estimated at close to $500 million.
        As part of the deal to sell Grey Global, Mr. Meyer agreed to give up his posts as chairman and chief executive of the Grey Worldwide division by September 2005. Then, 15 months later, he was to give up his duties as chairman and chief executive of Grey Global.
        Mr. Meyer ceded his Grey Worldwide duties on schedule last year, hiring James R. Heekin from Euro RSCG Worldwide, part of Havas. Still, in an industry filled with people who have never known anyone other than Mr. Meyer at the helm of Grey Global, many were convinced that he would figure out some way to stay.
        Mr. Meyer, who turns 80 next month, is well known for his ability to keep a steely grip on power, controlling Grey Global's destiny for three decades while building it into one of the world's biggest -- and most profitable -- agencies.
        But now, even Mr. Meyer concedes it is time for him to go, a decision Grey Global intends to announce formally today along with details of succession plans.
        ''A couple of years ago, I realized I was not immortal,'' Mr. Meyer, who joined Grey in 1956 in the account service department, said in an interview. ''I realized I ought to preserve the business I developed, and develop a second life.'' Mr. Meyer was referring to his decision in early 2004 to put Grey Global up for sale. The process ended with its acquisition by WPP, the world's second-largest agency company after the Omnicom Group, which added Grey Global to blue-chip agencies like JWT, Ogilvy & Mather and Y&R.
        ''Ed's been at it 50 years,'' Martin Sorrell, chief executive of WPP, said in an interview, comparing Mr. Meyer's track record at Grey Global with the achievements of splashier agencies that are only ''5 years, 10 years old.''
        ''The test is over time,'' Mr. Sorrell said, adding: ''It's not a 100-meter dash. It's a marathon. He has built an integrated operation with very big clients: Procter & Gamble, Nokia, GlaxoSmithKline. It's not short term and sexy, it's long term and powerful.''
        ''If I had been there 50 years ago, would I have done it necessarily the same way?'' Mr. Sorrell asked rhetorically, referring to Mr. Meyer's model of centralizing operations.
        ''Maybe not,'' he continued. ''But the results speak for themselves: Grey, Grey Health Care, G2, GCI, MediaCom, Wing Latino.'' Those are among the principal divisions of Grey Global, which handle tasks in addition to advertising that include digital marketing, media planning and buying, design and marketing aimed at Hispanic consumers.
        Mr. Meyer acknowledged that he had faced vociferous critics of the way he ran Grey Global.
        ''I built my career and the agency on the belief clients come first, and the job of the guy at the head of the agency is to know their needs,'' Mr. Meyer said. ''Not what they like for dinner, but their advertising needs, better than anyone at the agency.
        ''I built auxiliary services here like direct marketing not because I'm a genius, but because I got an early alert; I heard my clients talking about them,'' he added. ''If I waited for the guy or gal running the account to get that information to me, it'd be a year later.''
        Comparing himself with some other chief executives in the 1970s through the 1990s, Mr. Meyer said: ''I was one of the few guys who owned a big hunk of the agency he ran. Every penny I had was in here, so I had more at stake than anyone else.''
        ''I sweated it harder; I overruled people because I couldn't afford to be a nice guy.''
        Mr. Meyer said he noticed contradictions among the complaints. ''I used to get criticism because there was so little turnover, and yet I was called a 'benevolent dictator' who was harsh on people,'' he said. ''If I was, why didn't they leave?''
        Now, however, Mr. Meyer is taking a more mellow view.
        ''I've had a 50-year run and I had the opportunity to wake up one day and say, 'It's been enough,' '' he said, joking that he did not think he had ''another 50 years in me.''
        As of Jan. 1, Mr. Heekin, 57, is to take over for Mr. Meyer as chairman and chief executive of Grey Global while remaining chairman and chief executive of Grey Worldwide.
        ''It's a big baton,'' Mr. Heekin said of the passing of Mr. Meyer's Grey Global duties to him, adding that his principal goal would be to accelerate the evolution of the agency ''from an account-management-driven, advertising-focused legacy, which served us very well, into a creatively driven, total communications company.''
        ''Grey is an agency that needs to change; all agencies need to change,'' Mr. Heekin said, particularly ''when you've had single-minded management for the last 30 years.''
        Even so, ''18 of our 20 top clients grew with us in the past year,'' he added, referring to additional assignments from accounts like Darden Restaurants, Diageo, Nokia and Novartis.
        To signal a desire to end the days of Grey Global as a ''one-man band,'' as Mr. Heekin put it, he is reorganizing the senior management to help ''pull together the resources we have to make this into one company,'' he said, ''with one vision and one go-to-market strategy.''
        Joe Celia, 47, chairman and chief executive of G2, which oversees tasks like new media, direct marketing and design, will also serve as a vice chairman of Grey Global.
        Tim Mellors, 59, president and chief creative officer for the North American operations of Grey Worldwide, will be promoted to vice chairman and chief creative officer at Grey Global.
        Mr. Heekin said: ''There are three of us at the top who will share equally the challenge and responsibility'' of running Grey Global. ''It's a huge change.''
        Mr. Sorrell said he was delighted at the performance of Grey Global since the acquisition and at the ''very smooth transition'' from Mr. Meyer to Mr. Heekin at Grey Worldwide.
        Among his goals for Grey Global under the new leadership, Mr. Sorrell said he hoped the agency would work more closely with other parts of WPP, further develop its operations in fast-growing regions like Asia and Latin America and ''develop the digital side even more.''
        As for Mr. Meyer, he said that after he retired he intended to open a small investment boutique with his son, Tony, and ''finally get to spend real time'' with the charitable and cultural organizations he has supported financially.
        For instance, Mr. Meyer, who has been on the board of the Guggenheim Museum, is becoming its treasurer.
        As for the industry in which he spent five decades, Mr. Meyer said, ''I'll probably keep a subscription to Advertising Age and have lunch with some of my old pals in the business.
        ''That's about the size of it,'' he added. ''The time has now come to an end.''
        ADVERTISING
      