
        The kindest description of ''Home of the Brave,'' the first Hollywood movie to examine the experience of American soldiers returning from Iraq, might be that it is fueled by noble intentions.
        Directed by Irwin Winkler from a script by Mark Friedman, a first-time screenwriter, it wants to be a smaller-scaled, contemporary ''Best Years of Our Lives.'' And two of its characters -- one who has lost a hand and another who can't settle down -- carry echoes of that 1946 William Wyler classic. But as this cautious, politically evenhanded movie grinds along like clockwork, the fuse that should spark an emotional explosion fizzles after some sporadic hisses and sputters. Most of those noises emanate from Samuel L. Jackson as Will Marsh, a glowering, embittered Army medic who, once he is stateside, develops a drinking problem.
        By the end of ''Home of the Brave,'' you may feel as if you have just sat through an earnest made-for-television movie featuring actors who are too pretty to be real people dutifully recycling a formula. Devoid of personality, their tidy cut-and-paste speeches have the ring of carefully composed and edited distillations of previous home-from-the-front movies.
        Functional clockwork is not to be confused with good timing. ''Home of the Brave'' feels both premature and hopelessly stale: premature because so many thousands of American troops remain in Iraq with no timetable for an exit, and stale because the drama suggests a pallid imitation of the real thing so easily found in documentaries like ''The War Tapes.'' ''Home of the Brave'' suggests that when the time comes for Hollywood to take on the war in Iraq, those documentaries are going to pose a serious challenge to filmmakers seeking credibility.
        In the early scenes, set in southeastern Iraq (and filmed in Morocco), members of a National Guard unit rejoice at the news that they are about to be demobilized. But before they return to their hometown of Spokane, Wash., they are dispatched on a final humanitarian mission in the town of Al Hayy.
        Because not a word is spoken nor an action taken in the movie that isn't entirely predictable, you know that they will be ambushed. And in the battle sequence that follows, the life of one driver, Vanessa Price (Jessica Biel, as bland as she is impeccably coiffed), is saved by Will after an explosion blows up her jeep. But she loses a hand. Another soldier, Tommy Yates (Brian Presley, looking soap opera ready), witnesses his best friend's death.
        Then suddenly we're back in the States, where, after their welcome-home parties, the traumatized soldiers stew and sulk while loved ones question them worriedly and try to understand. The dialogue is so wooden you almost expect to hear ''the horror, the horror.'' As they try to adapt to civilian life, the movie too insistently splices their everyday experiences with flashbacks of their war experiences.
        Will hits the bottle, battles his hostile teenage son (Sam Jones III) and drives his wife, Penelope (Victoria Rowell), to the end of her patience. If the father-son scenes feel stiffly contrived, Mr. Jackson and Ms. Rowell at least strike a few angry sparks. Meanwhile Vanessa, a single mother, rejects her old boyfriend and tries to pretend that life, despite a prosthetic hand, is the same as it was before. The movie conveniently invents a Mr. Right who works at the school where she teaches. Tommy discovers that his old job in a gun store has been taken, and he is pushed by his bullying father to be a police officer, but nothing he tries seems to stick.
        With his scenes crudely shoehorned into the movie, Curtis Jackson (the rap star 50 Cent) plays Jamal Aiken, a lighted stick of dynamite with whom Tommy clashes in a group therapy session. Jamal soon goes ballistic and has a melodramatic standoff with the police at a fast-food outlet.
        Yes, the movie has action and high drama, but most of it feels synthetic. Consider ''Home of the Brave'' an honorable dud.
        ''Home of the Brave'' is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has profanity, scenes of violence and one sexual situation.
        Home of the Brave  Opens today in New York and Los Angeles.
        Directed by Irwin Winkler; written by Mark Friedman; director of photography, Tony Pierce-Roberts; edited by Clayton Halsey; music by Stephen Endelman; production designers, Jonathan McKinstry and Warren Alan Young; produced by Rob Cowan, George Furla and Avi Lerner; released by Metro Goldwyn Mayer. In Manhattan at Loews Lincoln Square, 1998 Broadway, at 68th Street. Running time: 101 minutes.
        WITH: Samuel L. Jackson (Will Marsh), Jessica Biel (Vanessa Price), Christina Ricci (Sarah Schivino), Curtis Jackson (Jamal Aiken), Chad Michael Murray (Jordan Owens), Victoria Rowell (Penelope Marsh), Sam Jones III (Billy Marsh) and Brian Presley (Tommy Yates).
        FILM REVIEW
      