
        Now that Tony Romo has finally stumbled, the Dallas Cowboys need him to recover quickly.
        Romo's seamless transition from little-known backup to darling of Dallas was rudely interrupted Sunday night. The Cowboys were manhandled by the New Orleans Saints, 42-17, and for the first time in seven games as a starting quarterback, Romo looked overwhelmed. He completed 16 of 33 passes for 249 yards and a touchdown. But he was intercepted twice and sacked twice, and when the Cowboys fell behind, he was unable to perform any late-game magic.
        After his team was dissected by the Saints, Coach Bill Parcells spent part of Monday dissecting Romo's performance. What was his conclusion? After giving Romo more and more offensive responsibility, perhaps he had finally reached overload.
        ''I think it's definitely something we have to talk over,'' Parcells said at a news conference. ''Cutting down some options on some of the things that we're doing. That would be under the category of simplifying.''
        Asked if he expected Romo to respond positively to Sunday's loss, Parcells said: ''I'd be hopeful of that. I think he'll do his best to do that.''
        The Cowboys lead the Giants and the Eagles by one game in the National Football Conference East, and they face a tough game in Atlanta (7-6) on Saturday night. They close out the regular season with home games against Philadelphia (7-6) on Dec. 25 and Detroit (2-11) on Dec. 31.
        Parcells knew this day was coming, the day when Romo would have a poor performance. It happens to all young quarterbacks, although Romo seemed immune for a time, having entered December as the highest-rated passer in the N.F.C.
        Now Drew Brees of the Saints holds that honor. Brees outplayed Romo on Sunday, picking apart the Cowboys with five touchdown passes and stealing the spotlight from Romo on a national stage.
        Unlike Romo and Parcells, Brees and Saints Coach Sean Payton successfully countered anything the defense threw at them. Having spent three years as an assistant in Dallas under Parcells, Payton knew the Cowboys' tendencies, and Brees said that knowledge helped the Saints.
        ''He knew a lot of the personnel and he was able to say, 'Hey, this route works better against this guy,' little things like that,'' Brees said after Sunday's game. ''Coach Payton, all year long, has done a phenomenal job of staying aggressive, mixing the run with the pass, knowing when it's time to take shots. He's making us all confident.''
        Now the Cowboys must focus on Romo's confidence. His first interception Sunday came during the second quarter, a pass intended for Terry Glenn that was picked off by Omar Stoutmire. Late in the third quarter, Romo tried to force a pass to tight end Jason Witten in the end zone, but Jason Craft had excellent position and made the interception.
        Romo threw two other passes that should have been intercepted -- a touchdown pass to Terrell Owens in the third quarter that deflected off the hands of Saints defensive back Fred Thomas, and a third-quarter pass that was dropped by Saints defensive back Mike McKenzie.
        Dallas did not practice Monday, but Romo insisted after Sunday's game that one poor performance would not shake him.
        ''If you let this affect you, it will affect your next game,'' Romo said. ''So as soon as I leave here today, I am going to try my best to let it go. Me being as competitive as I am, it will probably take me a little longer. But I will let it go when I get back out to practice.''
        Sometimes it takes only one poor game to send a young quarterback into a funk. Eli Manning of the Giants experienced that earlier this season, but if Romo struggles down the stretch, it could cost Dallas dearly.
        New Orleans gave opponents a blueprint on how to defend Romo, although it remains easier said than done. The Saints' pass rush was disciplined, preventing Romo from roaming out of the pocket to create big plays, one of his strengths. The Saints also contained Witten, a favorite target of Romo's, holding him to four catches for 33 yards.
        If Parcells scales back the playbook and simplifies the offense for Romo, Dallas runs the risk of becoming more predictable at the season's most critical time. If the Cowboys can win their final three games, they will win the division. But they have not yet secured a playoff spot, and a loss against Atlanta would leave them in a precarious position.
        Parcells preferred to be optimistic Monday.
        ''We have a short week and we still have plenty of opportunity,'' he said. ''The situation right now forced me to try to get rid of the doom and gloom that has set in here after this loss. There are a lot of people who would like to be in our position. We do have pressure on us to play well, but we're still in good position if we take advantage of it. If we win out, we win the division.''
        But instead of handling success, Romo now faces the challenge of dealing with adversity.
        Parcells said: ''I don't just worry about Tony, I worry about all of them. You've heard me say many times you can only lose a game once. We're still leading the division. We have a good opportunity. We just need to play good football here the rest of the way.''
        FOOTBALL
      