
        Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur has a lot more expertise at playing the angles than Brett Lebda, a 24-year-old defenseman who had one goal this season for the Detroit Red Wings before Saturday.
        Lebda tried his luck, anyway. He took a pass from Jason Williams in the third period and whisked a shot from Brodeur's far right. It sailed past Brodeur, scooted just under the crossbar and went in, lifting Detroit to a 2-1 victory.
        ''I thought I had everything covered -- he made the perfect shot,'' Brodeur said with a smile. ''I'm sure that if he'd do it again, he'd hit someone in the stands.''
        Lebda's fifth goal in 72 career N.H.L. games led to the third consecutive loss for the Devils (17-12-2), who play the Rangers on Sunday at Madison Square Garden and then Atlanta, the first-place team in the Southeast Division, on Tuesday.
        Lebda was 11 when Detroit last won a game at the Meadowlands, on Nov. 20, 1993. The Devils had beaten the Red Wings nine consecutive times at home, including twice in the 1995 Stanley Cup finals.
        ''I had a while to corral it and put it in the right spot where he couldn't get it,'' Lebda said, referring to his winning shot.
        His goal came at 10 minutes 43 seconds of the third period, or 2:16 after Pavel Datsyuk tied the score for the Red Wings (19-8-4). Datsyuk smacked a power-play goal past Brodeur after a shot by Mathieu Schneider ricocheted off the back wall.
        Through the first 48 minutes, Brodeur was superb, stopping all 28 shots and outplaying the 41-year-old legend at the other end of the ice, Detroit goaltender Dominik Hasek. But the Devils were getting sloppier by the minute.
        When Devils right wing Jamie Langenbrunner was penalized for holding the Red Wings' Daniel Cleary at 8:06 of the third period, Detroit went on its seventh power play.
        ''We used to win games earlier this year because we were a very disciplined team, but lately it's cost us,'' Devils Coach Claude Julien said. ''We've taken a lot of penalties, and the energy trying to kill them off takes away some of our momentum.''
        Datsyuk's seventh goal wiped out the Devils' 1-0 lead, gained on a second-period power-play goal by Scott Gomez, and turned a bizarre momentum-turning outburst by Hasek into an afterthought.
        Just past the midpoint of a tight, scoreless game, Hasek played a puck in front of the goal line and pulled it back toward him. He carried the puck over the goal line and into the strip of ice where goalies are not allowed to handle the puck.
        Hasek was called for a delay-of-game penalty. He lifted his stick high, slammed it on the ice, snapping it in two, and threw the jagged handle. An unsportsmanlike-conduct penalty was called.
        ''The frustration went both ways -- a little bit to me and a little bit to the ref,'' Hasek said.
        At 10:57 of the second period, Gomez scored his fourth goal of the season, and first power-play goal, by planting himself in front of the goal and tipping Brian Gionta's shot past defenseman Nicklas Lidstrom and Hasek.
        It was the first goal since Oct. 24 for Gomez, who missed eight of nine games over a three-week stretch because of a groin injury.
        ''When you lose, it just goes out the window,'' Gomez said of the goal.
        The Devils did not have another power play until Detroit's Robert Lang was called for hooking with 2:11 to play. Red Wings defenseman Chris Chelios slammed Gomez into Hasek with 31 seconds left, drawing an interference penalty.
        Brodeur was pulled, giving the Devils six skaters to three for Detroit. In the final 10 seconds, Gomez had the puck on his stick and an open goal in front of him, but the Devils were called for a hand pass. The game had already slipped away.
        ''You can't get into the rhythm if you don't play five-on-five,'' said Patrik Elias, the Devils' captain. ''I'm not going to say too much about the refs. I'll keep my mouth shut right now.''
        HOCKEY
      