
        A state development corporation has drastically decreased its projections for the amount of sales and income tax revenue it expects from the proposed Atlantic Yards project near Downtown Brooklyn.
        According to revised estimates prepared by the Empire State Development Corporation, which is sponsoring the $4 billion residential, commercial and arena project, it would generate $944 million in new revenue aside from what that the city and state have pledged in subsidies.
        That represents a drop of one-third, or nearly half a billion dollars, from the estimate the development agency released in July, which put new tax revenues at $1.4 billion. Under current plans, taxpayers would provide $453.5 million for the project, including a direct contribution of $200 million from the city and state, sales and mortgage recording tax exemptions, and bond financing.
        The drop in estimated tax revenue came after the project's overall size was cut by about 8 percent.
        The new estimate was issued on Friday, when the development agency's board voted to approve the mixed-use project, which would be built by Forest City Ratner Companies. Forest City is also the development partner in building a new Midtown headquarters for The New York Times Company.
        The project still requires approval by the state's Public Authorities Control Board. Votes on that board are controlled equally by Gov. George E. Pataki, a Republican; Sheldon Silver, the Assembly speaker, a Democrat; and Joseph L. Bruno, the Senate majority leader, a Republican.
        Mr. Silver and Governor-elect Eliot Spitzer, a fellow Democrat, have said they believe that the project's financing requires more scrutiny before it is approved. The issue is one of many on the negotiating table in Albany during Mr. Pataki's waning days in office, and he hopes to get the project approved before he leaves.
        The new estimate was included in a statement and other documents issued by the development agency on Friday, but the difference went unremarked in both the brief board meeting that preceded the approval vote and the news conference that Charles A. Gargano, the agency's chairman, held shortly afterward.
        Norman Oder, a journalist who has a blog devoted to the Atlantic Yards project, noticed the change later and wrote about it yesterday.
        A majority of the project's eight million square feet would be taken up by apartments. But officials at the development agency said that most of the half-billion-dollar revision reflected a cut in the amount of commercial space to be included in the project. Between the project plan issued in July and the one approved last week, that figure dropped from 606,000 square feet to 336,000.
        Commercial square footage usually generates far more tax revenue than residential space because it creates more indirect economic activity, like well-paying jobs in business services and administrative support. And residential space produces less estimated revenue, in part because tenants' income taxes are counted where they work, not where they live.
        Under the new estimates, the project would produce about 5,000 new jobs statewide, down from nearly 7,400 in the plan issued in July.
        Correction:  December 16, 2006, Saturday  An article on Thursday about a reduction in a New York State agency's projected tax revenue from the proposed Atlantic Yards project in Brooklyn misstated the amount of the decrease at one point in some copies. It is $476 million, not $476,000.
      