
        ''REJECTION,'' Peter Baxter replied wryly, when asked why he and three friends founded the Slamdance film festival 12 years ago. ''We were all rejected. Some great things come out of rejection.''
        He was referring, of course, to getting the snub from the Sundance festival, Utah's internationally renowned showcase of independent film.
        ''It was 1995, and Sundance was getting bigger,'' Mr. Baxter explained. And so, with a slim pile of films and a bit of youthful moxie, Mr. Baxter and his buddies decided to do the unthinkable -- go head to head with the big boys. Setting up shop in downtown Park City, Utah, just up the road from Sundance's headquarters, Slamdance ran the same week, marketing itself to guests as the indie alternative to the increasingly celebrity-studded Sundance.
        It worked. This year's 10-day Slamdance festival is expected to draw more than 20,000 film fans. ''We're a very friendly film festival -- it's very inclusive,'' Mr. Baxter said. ''That's a very important thing because it's not just about the industry responding to it. Filmmakers need a general audience of people who would normally go and see a movie.''
        Surprisingly, Slamdance isn't the only film festival willing to take its chances in January, the month of Sundance.
        When Roger Durling took over as director of the Santa Barbara International Film Festival four years ago, he found a mid-spring film festival with shaky attendance. He couldn't understand why a festival wouldn't thrive in beautiful Santa Barbara, Calif., with its endless shopping and first-rate restaurants. So he took a chance and moved it to late January. Not only would that attract East Coasters looking for a dose of sunshine, he figured, but the Santa Barbara festival could carve out its own niche: booking celebrities whom its organizers predicted might win Academy Awards in the spring, and offering guests an opportunity to mingle with them.
        Last year, the festival showed foresight by honoring George Clooney and Philip Seymour Hoffman. This year, Mr. Durling and his team sent out feelers to honor Will Smith as early as last March, and next month Mr. Smith will join Helen Mirren, Forest Whitaker and Al Gore at the festival.
        There probably won't be a rash of A-listers in nearby Pomona, Calif., next month for the ninth annual Smogdance, a tongue-in-cheek title poking fun at the city's permanent haze (Pomona is 35 miles east of Los Angeles). But guests will find a thriving local arts scene. ''We position ourselves against Sundance for fun,'' said Charlotte Cousins, the festival director. ''We are getting bigger and more sophisticated, but we aren't really trying to compete with Sundance.''
        Still, what began as a jury-rigged screening on the wall of the local dA Center for the Arts has developed into a three-day festival. And in 2006, a short animated film shown there, ''Badgered,'' was nominated for an Academy Award.
        The Beloit International Film Festival in Beloit, Wis., has a loftier goal -- to return to the spirit of film festivals' golden era, when guests talked film all night with directors and writers who were on hand and available for questions. ''And I'll bet no one else has limousine service for their guests,'' joked Ron Nief, the festival's public relations director. This year's lineup of more than 100 films is from 26 nations, and many fall under themes like human rights, food-based films, or an international genre called neo-noir.
        Themes now play an important role in Santa Barbara's film festival as well. When Mr. Durling found that the area's sizable Latino population wasn't being represented, he devoted a third of his festival's slots to films by Hispanic filmmakers. Recently, he added nature films. ''Now between you and me, I fall asleep at nature films,'' he said. ''But hey -- they draw a huge crowd.''
        When he started hunting down surf flicks and adventure-sports films to appeal to local college students, some asked why he would bother courting such a young crowd.
        ''Film festivals have a tradition of being for the elite, but they shouldn't be,'' Mr. Durling said. ''It should be like a candy store. Anyone should be able to walk in and grab whatever they want.''
        DETAILS
        PARK CITY, UTAH
        What: Slamdance Film Festival, www.slamdance.com; (323) 466-1786.
        When: Jan. 18 to 27.
        SANTA BARBARA, CALIF.
        What: Santa Barbara International Film Festival, www.sbfilmfestival.org; (805) 963-0023.
        When: Jan. 25 to Feb. 4.
        POMONA, CALIF.
        What: Smogdance Film Festival, www.smogdance.com; (909) 997-0761.
        When: Jan. 26 to 28.
        BELOIT, WIS.
        What: Beloit International Film Festival, www.beloitfilmfest.com; (800) 423-5648.
        When: Jan. 18 to 21.
        Ahead
      