
        Alan F. Shugart, an engineer and entrepreneur whose career defined the modern computer disk drive industry, died Tuesday in Monterey, Calif. He was 76.
        The cause was complications after a recent heart operation, said his son-in-law Mark Peterson.
        Beginning his career as an I.B.M. field service engineer repairing punch card accounting machines in 1951, Mr. Shugart was intimately involved in every important juncture of the computer storage industry for more than four decades. Over that time computer storage systems shrank from monsters the size of large washing machines to compact boxes that fit in the palm of the hand. At the same time, digital storage capacities soared from the equivalent of several books to whole libraries.After transferring to an I.B.M. research laboratory in San Jose, Calif., in 1955, Mr. Shugart helped develop the first disk drive, named the Ramac, for random access method of accounting and control, which was able to store five million characters of data. I.B.M. introduced the Ramac commercially in 1959 and initially rented the system for $750 a month. The drives required an air compressor, which rented for an additional $150 a month, Mr. Shugart recalled in a lecture given several years ago.
        During his 18 years at I.B.M. he managed the development of a number of products, including the I.B.M. 1301, a 50-megabyte disk system that was the basis for Sabre, the nation's first online reservation system, which I.B.M. created for American Airlines, said Jack Harker, a longtime I.B.M. engineer who worked with Mr. Shugart.
        At I.B.M., Mr. Shugart rose to become director of engineering for the systems development division, but left to join Memorex in 1969, eventually taking several hundred I.B.M. engineers with him.
        In 1972 he left Memorex to found Shugart Associates, which introduced a lower-cost 8-inch form-factor floppy disk drive. The technology was intended for a new class of smaller computers that were moving outside of the corporate data center, according to Finis Conner, a longtime business partner and sometime competitor of Mr. Shugart.
        At an early planning meeting, Mr. Conner recalled, the two men sketched out a simple graph on a napkin showing how cost would fall as volume increased.
        ''It was a march to mobility, taking the computing power out of the computing room and putting it into the desktop,'' said Mr. Conner, who first worked for Mr. Shugart at Memorex in the 1970s.
        Before starting Seagate, Mr. Shugart took a five-year hiatus from the computer industry, having been forced out at Shugart Associates in 1974 after a disagreement with the board. During the break, he moved to Santa Cruz, Calif., where he helped open a bar with friends and bought a fishing boat.
        In 1979, with Mr. Conner, he returned to the computer storage industry. The two founded Seagate Technology, the first maker of 5.25-inch hard disks, in 1979. At that time storage for personal computers was based on 5.25-inch floppy disks, and the two realized that a hard disk system of the same size but with a higher capacity would find a ready market.
        The company's first product stored five megabytes and sold for $1,500. It became an instant best seller, driven by the exploding growth of companies like Apple Computer, its first customer, and others.
        Born in Chino, Calif., in 1930, Alan Field Shugart studied engineering physics at Redlands University and started work at I.B.M. the day after he graduated. After leaving Seagate, he founded Al Shugart International, a venture capital company.
        He is survived by his wife, Rita, of Pebble Beach, Calif.; a sister, Margaret Kraght, of Glendora, Calif.; a son, Chris, of Monterey, Calif.; his daughters, Teri, of San Carlos, Calif.; Jill Bambace, of Aromas, Calif.; Mia Peterson of Carmel, Calif.; and Dana Bambace, of Carmel, Calif.; and seven grandchildren.
        Although Mr. Shugart was a leading figure in an industry characterized by constant technical innovation, he was financially conservative and took pride both in an informal business style and in focusing on business basics. He was also typical of a plain-spoken generation of Silicon Valley engineers who had little tolerance for bureaucracy or perceived phoniness. In 1996, he tried to run his Bernese mountain dog Ernest for Congress in a protest against the direction of both the country's major political parties.
      