
        The cellist Steven Isserlis has written fanciful children's books about Beethoven and Handel, and perhaps he's thinking of doing something with Schumann. For his concert Wednesday evening at Zankel Hall, billed as Steven Isserlis and Friends, he gathered a handful of colleagues for a program of Schumann's chamber music, ending with an incendiary account of the Piano Quartet in E-flat major (Op. 47).
        (The group was also scheduled to do a chamber concert last night, with more Schumann, Robert and Clara, and a hefty helping of Brahms.)
        An all-Schumann program can be risky, given the distance between this composer's great, inspired works and his mediocre ones. But Mr. Isserlis and his friends made good choices, and backed them up with alert, focused performances.
        Mr. Isserlis and the pianist Jeremy Denk began with a traversal of ''Five Pieces in Folk Style'' (Op. 102), notable not only for its energy and shapeliness, but also -- and more crucially -- for the degree to which it was a collaboration rather than a solo cello work with piano accompaniment. In the slow second piece Mr. Isserlis played with an understated lyricism that kept the piano line from fading into the background. In the quicker movements, the dialogue between cello and piano was consistently vivid.
        Mr. Isserlis and Mr. Denk were then joined by the violinist Joshua Bell for the Piano Trio No. 1 in D minor (Op. 63). The reading began as a burst of unabashedly steamy Romanticism, but it stealthily became a carefully considered and intensely rational performance. The group's approach to balances was fluid, with the level of engagement and interplay between the violin and the cello, and between each of the stringed instruments and the piano, constantly in flux.
        After the intermission Mr. Bell and Mr. Denk played the Three Romances (Op. 94). Mr. Bell couched the violin line in a warm, singing tone and Mr. Denk supported him solidly. But missing here -- partly the fault of the score and partly what seemed a matter of chemistry -- was the sense of equal collaboration that had breathed life into the ''Five Pieces in Folk Style.''
        That fire did return in the Piano Quartet, for which the violist Paul Neubauer joined the ensemble. The sharp accenting, brisk tempos and vigorous give and take that made the Piano Trio so illuminating did the same for the Quartet, which also had the benefit of being a better, or at least meatier, score.
        MUSIC REVIEW
      