
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Whichever Way the Wind Blows,'' by Thomas L. Friedman (column, Dec. 15):
        Finally, after six long years, the story is out that President Bush championed a wind energy program in West Texas that was so successful that even the local schools thrived from the new financing.
        Not only did Mr. Friedman bring that fact out of obscurity into the American mind, where we can use it to demand more from our president, but he also put together technical ideas that need to be understood now.
        Plug-in hybrid electric vehicles can be powered off wind energy on a large scale, thus clearing the air of emissions and robbing despotic states of oil revenues. But we the people need to dream big enough about such things to demand that the federal government do its part in restoring the energy grid.
        As the wife of a leading technologist at National Renewable Energy Laboratories, I've heard about these technical issues for years while loading the dishwasher. It's time the rest of the country knew about them, too.
        Once again, it's Mr. Friedman who brings the good news about what America can do to alleviate our most threatening national and global problems.
        Anne B. Butterfield  Boulder, Colo., Dec. 15, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Why does President Bush's lack of support for alternative energy like wind ''baffle'' Thomas L. Friedman? All he has to do is say: Dick Cheney.
        It was Vice President Cheney who developed the closed-door energy policy that favors Big Oil. It was Mr. Cheney who has consistently resisted revealing the names of those who attended that meeting.
        And it was Mr. Cheney who led in advocating the ill-conceived oil war in Iraq and then arranged for no-bid contracts to his former company, Halliburton, to spend billions in a failed effort to reconstruct Iraq's oil distribution system.
        The ill wind that blows on energy may be from the West Wing.
        Paul M. Wortman  Setauket, N.Y., Dec. 15, 2006
      