
        Inez Perez pulled a $20 bill from her purse, jammed it in the ''Hot Hot Super Jackpot'' slot machine and pushed the button. Up came ''7, Bar, Wishbone, Dice, Dice,'' and Mrs. Perez became the first winner at the PhiladelphiaPark Casino, a slot-machine parlor.
        Never mind that Mrs. Perez, a 47-year-old homemaker from North Philadelphia, won only $5. The race is on.
        On Tuesday, Philadelphia Park racetrack opened a gambling hall with a bar, a buffet and 2,200 slot machines.
        ''I have been going to Delaware and Atlantic City once a week,'' Mrs. Perez said. ''Now, this is lovely. It's 15 minutes away. I'll be coming here more now.''
        With an increasing number of states in the Northeast turning to legalized casino gambling as a way to shore up sagging treasuries and pump new life into racetracks, casinos in Atlantic City are warily watching the growing competition.
        ''When you combine that with the prospect of a smoking ban in Atlantic City casinos, I'd say that 2007 will be a challenging year for the casinos there,'' said Joseph Weinert, the vice president of the Spectrum Gaming Group, a casino consultant outside Atlantic City.
        Mr. Weinert, who made the trip here expressly to see how business was doing, said he was surprised by the crowded parking lot. ''For a Tuesday midday opening that had little advance notice and no push, it was awfully impressive to see all the cars here,'' he said.
        After a nine-month, $560 million makeover, the 32-year-old, second-tier racetrack a mile north of Philadelphia became the second racetrack-casino to open in Pennsylvania. Pocono Downs, about 100 miles north in Luzerne County, opened last month.
        State legislation in 2004 allowed existing racetracks to open slot parlors. On Wednesday, Pennsylvania is scheduled to award five licenses for casinos with slot machines --two in Philadelphia, one in Pittsburgh and two elsewhere in the state.
        Although these casinos will feature only slot machines -- at least for now -- their effect could be troubling for Atlantic City. Along with Pocono Downs and PhiladelphiaPark, a new operation is opening next month in Chester, Pa., outside Philadelphia. The potential exists for four new licenses in the Philadelphia area. Also, another casino recently opened at Yonkers Raceway in New York.
        Mr. Weinert estimated that the approximately 10,000 slot machines at Yonkers, Pocono Downs, PhiladelphiaPark and Chester could generate $1 billion a year, about one-fourth the take of slot machines in Atlantic City.
        ''It could create a whole new group of gamblers, but even then, it is likely at least to suck the growth out of Atlantic City, if the people there don't react,'' he said. ''That is why it is imperative for Atlantic City to continue to invest by the hundreds of millions into nongaming areas -- nightclubs, spas, restaurants -- as well as table games, which are an inevitability in Pennsylvania. But Atlantic City has to take advantage of that while it still has the competitive advantage.''
        David Jonas, the president and chief operating officer of PhiladelphiaPark, said Atlantic City had little to worry about.
        ''There seems to be a Starbucks on every corner and all of them are making money,'' said Mr. Jonas, who rose to the position of East Coast regional president for Harrah's in Atlantic City during his 22 years with the company. ''I think casino gaming is the same way. If we are good, it is only going to create more business for Atlantic City, for all of us.''
        The difference in the long run could be land. PhiladelphiaPark has 450 acres to build on, and it is already planning an expansion of the slots area, which will include retail stores and a hotel.
        By contrast, Pinnacle, a gambling company in Nevada, spent $250 million earlier this year for 24 acres where the recently closed Sands stood, and it plans to spend at least another $1 billion to build a gambling complex there.
        ''PhiladelphiaPark will do well,'' Mr. Weinert said. ''It will have other shopping nearby, lots of parking, upscale demographics. And who knows? People thought the Indian casinos in California would really hurt Las Vegas. It's been just the opposite, but the truth is Atlantic City should be concerned and do everything it can to still be the East Coast's destination gaming place.''
      