
        James F. Jones Jr. had been president of Trinity College for two years before a black student pointed out to him that he always ate lunch on the side of the dining hall where white students gather.
        Since that day last month, Mr. Jones, who is white, has made a point of taking a table on the other side, with the minority students.
        He also bought the book ''Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting Together in the Cafeteria?'' for his office, and recently handed out 45 copies to the college's trustees and senior administrators as ''required reading.''
        ''I didn't even know I was eating on the white side,'' Mr. Jones said.
        Trinity officials, professors and students have been forced to reexamine their daily interactions with one another this semester after a series of racially polarizing events that have drawn widespread complaints from minorities over what they see as a climate of incivility and intolerance within their privileged campus of Gothic spires.
        From classrooms to hip-hop concerts, the angry dialogue has led to some student protests and focused an unusual level of scrutiny on the college's practices and policies.
        Since October, two minority women have reported that racial slurs were scribbled on message boards outside their dorm rooms.
        Another student, who is white, painted himself black for a Halloween fraternity party and then posed for pictures that turned up on a popular Web site, Facebook.
        In addition, many of Trinity's minority students said they had long felt discriminated against.
        Some black students said they were regularly stopped at the campus library and asked to show identification while their white classmates just walked in, and at least one Hispanic professor complained to his colleagues of being mistaken for a janitor.
        Minority students and their supporters have staged protests, including one in which students spread out in the dining hall to desegregate it for a night, and called upon college officials to improve social relations by taking steps such as spelling out a racial harassment policy in the student handbook, incorporating race issues into the curriculum, and providing more financial aid as a way to broaden the socioeconomic diversity of the student body.
        ''I feel more tension here than ever before,'' said Ashlei Flemming, 19, a junior from West Palm Beach, Fla., adding that white students have avoided making eye contact and turned away from her because she is black. ''There are times when I want to feel good about Trinity, and then I walk out and I'm reminded of the underlying disgust that we have here for each other.''
        But other students like Chandler Barnard, who is white, said that they have not seen any discrimination against minorities on campus. ''I kind of think it is blown out of proportion a little bit,'' said Mr. Barnard, a 20-year-old junior who said his hometown, Lubbock, Tex., is much more conservative on such social issues. ''I don't see it as that big of a problem.''
        The debate over race relations at Trinity comes as other colleges and universities are confronting similar situations. For instance, Johns Hopkins University officials suspended a fraternity after its ''Halloween in the Hood'' party invited students to wear ''bling bling'' and ''hoochie hoops.'' Similarly, a group of first-year law students at the University of Texas at Austin were reprimanded for participating in a ''ghetto fabulous'' costume party and posting the pictures from it online.
        But the impact seems to be magnified at a small liberal arts college like Trinity, which has 2,165 undergraduates.
        Founded in 1823 by Episcopalian leaders, Trinity has a long tradition of religious freedom and expression among its students. In recent decades, college officials said they have sought to promote racial diversity and tolerance as well.
        Currently, one in five of Trinity's students are minorities, but that is significantly lower than at other similarly sized liberal arts schools. For instance, minority students make up about 36 percent of the students at Swarthmore College, 31 percent at Amherst College, 28 percent at Williams College and 26 percent at Wesleyan University.
        Yet Trinity does have one of the highest acceptance rates among liberal arts colleges for black students, who make up 5 percent of the student body, according to a survey by the Journal of Blacks in Higher Education. In 2006, Trinity accepted 52.8 percent of black applicants, compared to 42.8 percent of all applicants. In comparison, Amherst accepted 48.3 percent of black applicants, Swarthmore accepted 37.4 percent, and Wesleyan accepted 34.7 percent. Those schools, which are generally more competitive academically, have had better luck getting African-Americans to enroll than Trinity.
        Mr. Jones said that Trinity had also tried to improve diversity by increasing its financial aid at a time when other parts of the budget are being cut. Trinity, which has a $380 million endowment, plans to use about one-third of its current $300 million capital campaign to further expand that aid, he said. About 37 percent of Trinity students receive financial aid; the college's tuition and room and board costs $42,410 annually.
        ''As an institution, we are committed to doing everything humanly possible for the diversity of the student body,'' Mr. Jones said.
        This is not the first time that Trinity has been divided by racial tensions. In 2003, the college canceled classes so that more than 1,500 students and faculty members could hold a ''Dialogue Day'' on race and diversity. It was prompted by complaints from black and Hispanic male students that they were being singled out for greater scrutiny by Hartford police officers.
        After this semester's racial divisions, college officials held a forum last month on ''socially offensive and unacceptable behavior'' at the campus theater that drew hundreds of students and faculty members. The college is also reviewing its harassment and bias policies, and forming a committee of trustees, faculty members and students to address social issues. The committee is expected to report its findings in May.
        ''These incidents are catalysts for change,'' said Peter Blum, a trustee and 1972 graduate, who said he was shocked and disturbed by the racial events. ''You have to do some soul searching as an institution and reinforce your commitment to getting it right.''
        The harshest assessments of Trinity's diversity efforts have come from its own students. Based on student surveys, Trinity has made the Princeton Review's annual list of schools with ''little race/class interaction'' for the past eight years. Trinity topped the list in three of those years, and is currently ranked fourth. College officials have disputed the methodology of the surveys.
        David Calder, 20, a junior from Columbia, Md., said that he had grown frustrated with what he saw as the college's short-term fixes and its reluctance to undertake more drastic measures such as banning fraternities. ''In our experiences at Trinity and in life, committees don't do much,'' said Mr. Calder, who is white. ''They're very good at smiling and patting themselves on the back, but at the end of the day, nothing gets done.''
        Karla Spurlock-Evans, the dean of multicultural affairs, acknowledged that one of the college's most ambitious diversity efforts -- a two-year ''Pride and Prejudice'' initiative that was to follow ''Dialogue Day''-- never got under way because of administrative changes. (Trinity has had four presidents, and one acting president, since 2000).
        But she argued that other programs have provided support to minority students, and fostered more tolerance and respect on campus. ''I know students are frustrated because they're only here four years and they want to see it while they're here,'' she said. ''But I've been here a long time, and I know every effort counts.''
        Christina Ramsay, 19, an African-American sophomore, conducted her own social experiment on race relations. Last spring, Ms. Ramsay crossed to the other side of the dining hall and sat down at a table normally occupied by white football players. She said that several of the players got up and moved, while others stared at her throughout dinner without saying a word to her. ''I wanted to hide under the table,'' she recalled. ''By the end of it, I was just really upset.''
        When asked about Ms. Ramsay's experiment, several of the football players said last week that they had been confused to find her at the table, not because she was black but because she did not usually sit with them. They said that she had not tried to talk to them, either, and that they resented being used unknowingly as the subject of her experiment.
        ''It has nothing to do with race, it's where we always sit,'' said Jeff Carpenter, 22, a junior from Pottstown, Penn. ''As football players, we get stereotyped all the time.''
      