
        Amanda Congdon, the comely online newsreader, has a new job. After her whirlwind departure from the webcast news show Rocketboom, in July, Ms. Congdon -- a droll, blond Rosalind Russell for the digital generation -- has at last landed at ABCNews.com.
        Now in the warm embrace of the mainstream media, this onetime indie figure is making online video segments on eclectic subjects. And ABC is meanwhile promising its groovy young girlfriend that she won't have change a bit, even for corporate events: no first-lady suits, no hot-roller hair, no mannequin makeup. Ever. On her first minishow, which became available yesterday on ABC's Web site, Ms. Congdon shows up in a taut Steely Dan T-shirt and opens with her trademark girly casualness: ''O.K., this is weird.''
        That's a decently far cry from Barbara Walters.
        The item she goes on to report isn't all that weird -- the actress Tori Spelling held a tag sale that was filmed for her reality show -- but never mind that. What stands out is Ms. Congdon's reflexive bafflement, well known to fans from Rocketboom. Like a teenager, she seems exaggeratedly puzzled by whatever's at hand; she's too cool for almost everything, and good for her.
        To achieve this effect, she often appeals to the camera -- the audience? God? -- to find out what's going on. Slim, swan-necked, with the upright bearing of a dancer or cadet, she doesn't exactly lean in for intimacy with the viewer. She's not relatable. She seems a touch abstemious. The news, it seems, kind of grosses her out.
        Before dismissing this as eek-a-mouse-ing by a news bimbo, though, it's worth thinking harder about the pose. If anchormen like Peter Jennings cultivated brave, value-neutral stoicism about the news, it wasn't always so. Watch old Walter Cronkite broadcasts now and what comes through is the marvelous moralism that used to inform every syllable of his speech.
        Consider, for example, the way Mr. Cronkite laced with acid the words ''drugs'' and ''alcohol'' when referring to accidents or addictions. (Clips of him are available on YouTube.com.) His sentences are always loaded with enemies and heroes; clauses do battle with one another, often ending in a rueful truce. By contrast Mr. Jennings's urbane style tamped down the melodrama and brought Apollonian reason to his reports.
        And so the pendulum swings back. In another key -- and of course in the quickie-video medium -- Ms. Congdon may be reprising Mr. Cronkite's melodrama. If it's not good and evil that preoccupy her, it's at least ''cool'' and ''weird.'' And that's not entirely trivial. On Rocketboom she used expressions and interjections (Cool! Weird!) to interpret and inflect primary sources, and often that was enough. Last year her report on Hurricane Katrina simply played various television interviews in New Orleans. Then the camera returned to her. She gave a loose, flinging shrug that tersely conveyed disbelief, fury and sadness. It was an editorial in itself.
        This works well in the ultrashort news clips she'll be doing on ABCNews.com. On the premiere segment, her take on Oxycyte, a new blood substitute, restores to science news a nice wowee factor that's often missing from more staid reports. ''I also found it interesting that milk was tested in the 19th century as a replacement for blood,'' she adds, sounding like an earnest seventh-grader. It's catching.
        Though Ms. Congdon quickly offsets that show of exuberance with a dash of sarcasm, it's still unmistakably there. She's plainly an enthusiast: for new media, for old media, for Amanda Congdon, for the possibility of being smart and pretty at the same time and furthermore doing something cool and kind of like weird.
        THE WEB
      