
        Thanks to an intersection of misfortune and simple arithmetic, the illness of Senator Tim Johnson, a no-frills, no-fanfare Democrat and a fourth-generation South Dakotan, swiftly turned into a topic for speculation across the country.
        But the last place Mr. Johnson, 59, would ever want to find himself, people in his state say, is smack in the center of the national spotlight, and especially over the partisan split in the Senate. And the same holds true for many ordinary South Dakotans.
        Here in a state of about 770,000, people said they were reeling on Thursday from the prospect of being thrust into a national political scramble, repulsed by all the talk in Washington of possible succession, and, most of all, waiting anxiously for news about the health of the senator many residents simply call Tim.
        ''He works quietly -- silently,'' said Jan Nicolay, a former Republican legislator who served in the statehouse in Pierre when Mr. Johnson was a lawmaker there. ''He doesn't do grandstanding and he never looks for publicity. He's a quiet, behind-the-scenes worker who doesn't play party politics and who wouldn't like all this attention one bit.''
        In Pierre, Sioux Falls and Vermillion, Mr. Johnson's hometown, political leaders from both parties refused to speculate about what could happen if he were not to return to the Senate.
        John Thune, the state's other senator and a Republican, issued a brief statement encouraging South Dakotans to keep Mr. Johnson in their prayers. Russ Levsen, a spokesman for Representative Stephanie Herseth, a Democrat and the state's only member of the House, said she had issued a similar plea, as did Gov. Michael Rounds, a Republican.
        But beyond the prayers, most political leaders said little, or nothing -- at least not publicly.
        ''South Dakotans find all this talk of succession to be completely unnecessary and distasteful at this point,'' Mr. Levsen said.
        In the case of a vacancy in the Senate, state law calls for Mr. Rounds to appoint a replacement for the remainder of the term.
        Some historians here pointed to another health crisis, in which the provision was never used: In 1969, Senator Karl Mundt, Republican of South Dakota, suffered a debilitating stroke, but remained in office for four more years.
        In South Dakota, Republicans control both the House and the Senate, and the state has generally voted Republican for president, most recently giving President Bush nearly 60 percent of the vote in 2004.
        But it is also a state where Democrats, like former Senator Tom Daschle, Ms. Herseth and Mr. Johnson have thrived -- mostly, people here say, on their individual appeal.
        ''The truth is, if you asked most people here what party Tim Johnson belongs to, they would tell you they don't know,'' said David Kranz, the longtime political columnist for The Argus Leader of Sioux Falls. ''When people say 'Why has he done so well?' the answer is that he really has never done anything that made people mad. And he isn't real loud and noisy about it, but he doesn't always vote with his party.''
        Mr. Johnson, who earlier served in the State Legislature and the United States House, has cast votes, Mr. Kranz said, that may not have played well within his party nationally but that South Dakotans largely supported. He voted to confirm Samuel A. Alito Jr. to the Supreme Court and for President Bush's tax cuts.
        Here, Mr. Johnson is the guy who will sit for hours to talk, not run off when the cameras turn off; the great-grandson of a South Dakotan who homesteaded near Centerville; the man whose family has ''already taken its share'' (cancer both for him and his wife, Barbara, and deployments for their military son, Brooks, to places including Iraq).
        Never flashy, never loud, maybe even a tad dull.
        ''He's a fine young man,'' said Donna Schafer, a Republican state legislator who, like so many other people here, has a personal link to Mr. Johnson's family. (She taught one of his sons in school years ago.) ''I was out with a group last night -- Republicans and Democrats -- and everyone of them was just struck at how tragic this is.''
      