
        I HAVE always hated calling ourselves Nutmeggers, and I've always struggled to find a better term. The name is horrible, but the problem is that there has been no good substitute. And every time we say Nutmegger, we have to explain it. ''You see, Connecticut's early traders had the reputation for mixing in wooden nutmegs when they sold the real nuts. So we became know as Nutmeggers.''
        At least that's one theory. Another is that buyers couldn't tell the real nuts from the phony ones and hung us with a bad rap. Or that Connecticut sailors on ships returning from the Spice Islands in the West Indies, where nutmeg is grown, whittled wooden nutmegs and sold them as souvenirs.
        In any case, the name wasn't meant as a compliment.
        The Web site netstate.com says we're called Connecticuters, but that's not true. No one in his right mind says that mouthful. It is a speed bump of a word, as if you were trying to say Connecticut while going over the rumble strips at a toll plaza. (In New York, of course, because Connecticut was nice enough to get rid of its tolls years ago. We wait and take your quarters at the slot machines in Ledyard.) I understand that Cotton Mather once referred to us as Connecticotians, but that was years after he had attended the Salem witch trials. That would muddle any man.
        Other states don't have our problem. South Dakotans and Pennsylvanians are also mouthfuls, but in a lyrical way. So are Delawareans and Illinoisians, but netstate says they were once called Suckers, which makes even Nutmeggers a relief. Vermont has Vermonters, Rhode Island has Rhode Islanders (although that makes them sound like a hockey team) and New Hampshire has New Hampshirites. Massachusetts almost had our problem, but avoided Massachuttsian by going with Bay Stater.
        Maine has the unfortunate Mainers, but they were clever enough to also start calling themselves Down Easters, whatever that means.
        I almost began to feel bad for Wyoming residents, who are saddled with the tongue-twister Wyomingites, but at least they live in a state that is impressively known as Big Wyoming.
        Big Connecticut? Only in the state's dreams (it is the third-smallest, after all).
        Of course, like Big Wyoming, this is all about image. Take New York. They're New Yorkers, tough guys. Virginians? They're noble. Tennesseans, Kansans, Nebraskans -- solid. Floridians -- sunny. Texans -- back off. But what do we have? Nutmegger -- cheat. Ouch.
        The Connecticut comedian Jane Condon teamed with an artist to put out a state calendar a few years ago. On its cover was one of those highway signs you see at the state border. It reads, ''Welcome to Connecticut. Please Dress Nice.''
        I like that, because that's what we are, nice. We try to raise our children to be well mannered, our neighbors are usually considerate and generous and our governor has a reputation that goes beyond nice. The TV anchor Joanne Nesti is retiring this month after more than 20 years at Channel 30. How did she last so long? She's smart, which helped, but while anchors have to come across as nice for us to allow them into our living rooms, Ms. Nesti actually is. She's surprisingly down-to-earth for someone who has been on television every night for two decades.
        Nutmegger no longer describes us. No one calls Illinoisians Suckers anymore, or Delawareans Muskrats, but we're still stuck with a colonial insult. I could ask readers to come up with a better name for us, but I don't like asking a question that I can't answer myself. Because, frankly, I have no good answer. I just know Nutmegger is all wrong.
        If we change the state's name to Litchfield, after the beautiful county, we could call ourselves Litchfielders, which sounds quite hardy and very New England, but the Fairfielders, Hartforders and New Londoners would surely balk. But at least it would get the conversation started.
        How about something off the idea of nice. Nice Staters. Nicenes? No, that's taken. Nicers? Nicer than New Yorkers? True, but why rub it in? A survey by Quinnipiac University this year found that about two-thirds of the residents polled said they were satisfied with their life in Connecticut, a showing that made us the happiest state in the region by far. (Even with their cooler names, New York came in at 39 percent and New Jersey at a pathetic 30 percent.) Are we content in Connecticut? You bet, except for that splinter of a nickname. So how about Contenticuters?
        I know, Nutmeggers has a better ring to it. Contenters, then? That's my last offer.
        E-mail: conn@nytimes.com
      