
        Carmelo Anthony wanted to be a first-time All-Star this season, and was playing like a most valuable player contender.
        Anthony, the Denver Nuggets' fourth-year forward, wanted to be equal to his draft classmates LeBron James and Dwyane Wade, and was outshining them this season by leading the N.B.A. in scoring.
        He was the best player on the United States men's basketball team at the world championship last summer, when he remade his image on the court.
        And after spending $1.5 million to open a youth center with his name on it in Baltimore on Thursday, Anthony, 22, appeared to have the N.B.A. in the palm of his hand.
        But with one close-fisted punch Saturday night, he might have undone all the good he had created.
        Anthony is expected to be suspended today for his role in a brawl at Madison Square Garden in which 10 players were ejected. Anthony sucker-punched the Knicks' Mardy Collins in retaliation for Collins's flagrant foul on J. R. Smith.
        ''Last night's altercation with the Knicks escalated further than it should have,'' Anthony said in a statement. ''I take full responsibility for my actions in the matter. In the heat of the moment, I let my emotions get the best of me. I apologize to the fans, the Denver Nuggets, the N.B.A., my mother and my family for the embarrassment I have caused them.''
        The N.B.A. was also investigating the role of Knicks Coach Isiah Thomas, who might have helped establish the contentious atmosphere by ordering a flagrant foul.
        In a telephone interview last night, Anthony's agent, Calvin Andrews, confirmed that Anthony said Thomas had warned him not to go to the basket in an on-court conversation 17 seconds before the incident.
        A punch warrants an automatic one-game suspension, but judging by the stringent standards that Commissioner David Stern has imposed on players the last two seasons, Anthony's suspension will be far longer. A long suspension for Anthony could have a devastating effect on the Nuggets (13-9), currently in seventh place in the Western Conference.
        For a day, Denver had to put aside efforts to acquire 76ers guard Allen Iverson, as they participated in the league's investigation.
        ''He's been laying low, in the house, very quiet,'' Andrews said of Anthony. ''He knows it was not the right move, that he must deal with it and face it.''
        In his statement, Anthony also extended his remorse to Collins. ''I also want to make a personal apology to Mardy Collins and his family,'' he said. ''My actions were inexcusable, and I am sorry for making this an even more embarrassing situation.''
        That Anthony was still in a game with Denver leading by 19 late in the fourth quarter clearly upset Thomas, and he admitted telling that to Anthony as the fight broke up.
        Thomas tried to put the onus on Nuggets Coach George Karl. The two had verbally sparred last summer over how Thomas had treated Larry Brown, a close friend of Karl's who was fired by the Knicks in June.
        Karl was not available to comment yesterday.
        After the game, which Denver won, 123-100, Karl told reporters: ''We were conservative and substituted conservatively in the second half. Sometimes you just have to finish the game with the guys on the court.''
        The Nuggets had squandered four double-digit leads in the fourth quarter this season, including against the Knicks. Denver had a 12-point lead early in the quarter of the Knicks' 109-107 victory on Nov. 8.
        Anthony's league-leading 31.6 points a game have come efficiently. He is averaging 37.5 minutes and shooting 50.3 percent from the floor while raising his assists to a career-high 4.1 a game.
        Over the past two years, Anthony has tried to overcome missteps that have had public ramifications. In 2004, he appeared in a controversial video that threatened those who inform the police about criminal activity.
        He was also caught on the team plane with marijuana in a backpack that belonged to a friend. On the day he signed his five-year, $80 million contract this past July, the police found marijuana in his car, which was being driven by another friend.
        In an October interview, Anthony insisted that he had matured on and off the court. ''You learn from mistakes,'' he said.
        Anthony had produced a crisp documentary-type commercial showing how hard he works off the court and the time he spends doing community service. They are genuine pursuits, according to those closest to him and several league officials.
        ''What makes this all the more painful is that this was one of the most important weeks of my life,'' Anthony said in his statement. ''I just realized one of my biggest dreams when we opened the youth center in Baltimore that bears my name. To see the community excited and hundreds of kids smiling was an incredible feeling. Now the thought of thousands of kids seeing this incident on TV pains me. This is not the example I want to set.''
        PRO BASKETBALL
      