
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Israel Fading, Iran's Leader Tells Deniers of Holocaust'' (news article, Dec. 13):
        President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran must be condemned for his lies denying the historical fact of the Holocaust. But remember that his real agenda is not just to deny that six million Jews were systematically murdered by the Nazi regime but also to give the Holocaust a sequel.
        As Foreign Minister Manouchehr Mottaki explained, ''If the official version of the Holocaust is thrown into doubt, then the identity and nature of Israel will be thrown into doubt.''
        Mr. Ahmadinejad has been equally blunt, using the occasion to repeat his threat to wipe Israel off the map.
        We must respond to this monster by never forgetting that the Holocaust did indeed happen and by trying to ensure that it never happens again.
        Stephen A. Silver  Walnut Creek, Calif., Dec. 13, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Your Dec. 13 report about the Holocaust-denial conference in Iran quoted Germany's chancellor referring to the attendees as ''revisionists,'' and France's foreign minister criticized ''the resurgence of revisionist ideas'' regarding the Holocaust.
        While these leaders are well intentioned and their condemnations of the Tehran conference are most welcome, we take issue with their use of the term ''revisionists'' when referring to those who deny the Holocaust.
        The deniers prefer to be called ''revisionists'' because they believe that the term gives them legitimacy, hearkening back to post-World War I historians who disputed conventional portrayals of various aspects of that war.
        Typically, those 1920s revisionists were well-regarded scholars offering legitimate alternative interpretations of historical facts. By contrast, the ''Holocaust revisionists'' are bigots whose denial of the Holocaust is merely a new mask for old-fashioned anti-Semitism, a fact confirmed by last year's United States government report on anti-Semitism around the world, which pointedly included manifestations of Holocaust denial as examples of anti-Semitism.
        Deborah E. Lipstadt  Rafael Medoff  Washington, Dec. 13, 2006
        The writers are, respectively, a professor of modern Jewish and Holocaust studies at Emory University; and director of the David S. Wyman Institute for Holocaust Studies.
        To the Editor:
        The anti-Semitic conference organized by President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran is a petulant attempt by the Iranian dictatorship to maintain the attention of the international media.
        It is quite certain that rational human beings are not likely to deny historical events in which people who actually experienced the atrocities of the Holocaust are still alive to tell their tales.
        But if historical revisionism becomes an accepted forum of debate, then can't all historical atrocities, events and stories be denied?
        Judith Holtzman  Brooklyn, Dec. 13, 2006
      