
        The risks of the controversial antibiotic Ketek outweigh its benefits for minor illnesses and it should not be sold to patients with sinusitis or bronchitis, a federal advisory panel concluded yesterday.
        The panel stopped short of taking Ketek off the market, voting 16 to 3 that it could still be used for mild to moderate pneumonia, the most serious of the three conditions for which it is prescribed. But even for that illness, the drug should be a secondary alternative to other medicines, the panel said.
        A majority of the 19-member panel also recommended that Ketek should carry a so-called black box warning about its rare but potentially serious side effects, which include liver failure, visual disturbances, loss of consciousness and serious aggravation of myasthenia gravis, a neuromuscular condition. The warning is the strongest that the F.D.A. can require drug makers to include on a drug's label.
        The panel's recommendations came at the end of a two-day hearing that also resurrected broader questions about the use of antibiotics for conditions like sinusitis and bronchitis, which often go away by themselves, as well as the casual way the drugs are prescribed, often over the phone.
        Of 12 patients who suffered liver failure while taking Ketek, only two were being treated for a serious illness.
        ''I myself would not take that risk,'' said one panel member, Joan Hilton, an associate professor of epidemiology and biostatistics at the University of California, San Francisco. The F.D.A. has attributed nine deaths worldwide to Ketek's use.
        The F.D.A. is not bound to abide by the recommendations of its scientific advisory panels, but it usually follows them. And the panel's vote could signal a virtual death knell for Ketek in the United States. Despite the hopes of its makers, the French company Sanofi-Aventis, it has never captured a huge part of the antibiotics market.
        Nearly six million prescriptions have been written for Ketek in the United States since it was approved in 2004, but sales dropped sharply after safety issues were raised this year and the F.D.A. issued a warning about the drug's potential liver toxicity. Sales of the drug in 2005 were $148 million and they are down substantially this year, according to prescription data.
        Sanofi-Aventis presented data Thursday at the hearing that the drug was safe, and the company has argued that the liver problems associated with Ketek are in line with those of some other antibiotics.
        The two-day advisory hearing was the culmination of a torturous regulatory history for the drug, which faced protracted approval delays and became the focal point of a criminal investigation and a Senate investigation.
        The F.D.A. first raised questions about liver problems associated with Ketek in 2001, a year after the company first applied for approval. The agency required an additional safety study before it would approve the drug.
        That study of 24,000 patients was fraught with problems. A doctor in charge of one study site ended up in jail for fraud, and another lost his medical license.
        Then, last spring, Sanofi-Aventis announced a pause in its clinical trials of Ketek to treat ear infections and tonsillitis in children after The New York Times reported on an internal memo written by an F.D.A. official, Dr. Rosemary Johann-Liang, questioning the safety of the drug. Shortly afterward, the F.D.A. warned that Ketek could cause liver problems, noting 110 adverse reports involving the drug, including 12 of liver failure and 23 involving serious liver injury. Ketek was one reason for a long delay in the Senate confirmation hearings of Dr. Andrew C. von Eschenbach as the F.D.A. commissioner, which were postponed after Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa accused him of withholding data from the Senate.
        Highlighting the intense controversy over Ketek, a former F.D.A. medical officer, Dr. David Ross, took the unusual step of testifying against the drug during the public hearing portion of yesterday's advisory panel meeting in Silver Spring, Md.
        ''Management was so bent on approval that I was pressured to soften my review,'' Dr. Ross told the panel.
        Liver problems have been associated with other antibiotics, but an F.D.A. analysis found that the rate of adverse reports with Ketek was higher. The Ketek rate, however, was lower than the liver problems linked to an antibiotic that had been taken off the market.
        The comparison was difficult because doctors voluntarily report adverse events and there is no way to know how many other adverse events occur that are not reported.
        But an internal review found that Ketek also was associated with more cases of exacerbation of myasthenia gravis, a rare neuromuscular disease, than eight comparison drugs. At least six of the cases were serious.
        F.D.A. officials also said that the drug had been linked to visual disturbances and loss of consciousness, in one case resulting in a traffic accident in which a pedestrian was killed.
      