
        Ending a marathon contract dispute that included an illegal 60-hour transit strike, an arbitration panel ruled yesterday that the city's subway and bus workers and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority must abide by essentially the same deal that the two sides approved almost a year ago.
        The bitter and sometimes bizarre labor dispute went to arbitration earlier this year, after the transit workers first voted to reject the post-strike settlement, then voted to approve it, only to have the transportation authority repudiate the deal altogether.
        Seeking to restore some amity and peace between the feuding parties, the arbitration panel wrote that the best way to resolve the impasse was to award a contract that was as close to identical as possible to what the two sides agreed to last December, just days after the first transit strike since 1980.
        The arbitration ruling came the same day that Roger Toussaint, the president of Local 100 of the Transport Workers Union and the man who led last December's strike, was declared the winner in a hotly contested election, giving him a third three-year term. With some votes still uncounted, union officials said that Mr. Toussaint would win with slightly less than 50 percent of the vote. His failure to secure a majority indicated the level of dissatisfaction among union members over the strike and its muddled aftermath. He had faced a tough challenge from Barry Roberts, a union vice president, and three other opponents.
        The three-person arbitration panel called for a raise averaging 3.5 percent a year for three years. It also called for the reimbursement of $130 million to some 20,000 transit workers who had paid too much into the pension fund.. That last provision in the original deal drew strong criticism from Gov. George E. Pataki.
        The arbitration ruling, like the original deal, will also require the transit workers to pay 1.5 percent of their wages as premiums for health insurance. That was the provision that most angered the union's members, causing them to vote down the settlement at first. It also helped fuel broader opposition in the union to Mr. Toussaint.
        The arbitration decision is binding on the two sides, and in effect sets the terms for a new 37-month contract that runs retroactively from Dec. 16, 2005, until Jan. 15, 2009.
        Explaining his reasoning, George Nicolau, the chairman of the three-man panel, said, ''The panel was of the opinion that the most just and reasonable determination was to reflect, as much as possible under the law, the agreement that the representatives of the parties had reached on Dec. 27, 2005.''
        The other two members of the panel were Gary J. Dellaverson, the authority's director of labor negotiations, and Basil A. Paterson, a former New York secretary of state.
        The contract was submitted in January to the 33,700 union members who work for the authority, and was rejected by a razor-thin margin of just seven votes.
        But when the union's members, urged by Mr. Toussaint, overwhelmingly approved the settlement in a second vote last April, the transportation authority refused to accept the deal, saying that it had been voided by the first vote.
        That set the stage for arbitration, which involved 23 witnesses, 172 exhibits and 1,742 pages of transcripts.
        The two sides had kind words for the arbitration decision, but each side used it to jab at the other.
        Mr. Dellaverson said the authority was ''very pleased'' with the arbitration ruling, while Mr. Toussaint said it offered the workers the same deal the union had originally negotiated. He said the authority had failed in its goal to get the arbitrators to give the union something worse than the original deal.
        Mr. Toussaint criticized Peter S. Kalikow, the authority's chairman, for insisting that the dispute go to arbitration and for spending nearly $2 million to have a law firm handle the arbitration for the authority.
        ''Every New Yorker should be furious at the M.T.A.,'' Mr. Toussaint said, adding that Mr. Kalikow had wasted large sums on legal fees ''in a pigheaded attempt to embarrass transit workers in arbitration.''
        In an interview, Mr. Kalikow jokingly said that his wife would probably agree that he was pigheaded.
        Mr. Kalikow denied the union's claims that the authority had failed in the arbitration, and made it clear that he still blamed the union for going on strike and violating the state's Taylor Law, which prohibits strikes by public employees. ''If you think that a guy is a loser who obeys the law, then we've got a real problem in this city and this country,'' he said. ''We obeyed the law.''
        He said the tens of millions of dollars in fines that the union has been ordered to pay as a result of the illegal strike far outweighed the authority's legal expenses.
        Mr. Kalikow said it was a good contract because it makes employees pay part of their health insurance premiums for the first time. Mr. Toussaint has repeatedly defended the deal he negotiated, saying it provided solid raises, improved health benefits for retirees and reimbursed the pension overpayments.
        The arbitration panel called on the two sides -- as they had originally agreed -- to urge the State Legislature to approve the $130 million reimbursement for the overpayments to the pension fund. But the panel said that if the Legislature failed to approve that reimbursement, it would then order the transportation authority to pay it.
        Correction:  December 21, 2006, Thursday  An article on Saturday about a ruling by an arbitration panel that ended a contract dispute between the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and New York City transit workers gave an incorrect number in some copies of witnesses who responded to the panel. It was 23, not 234.
      