
        Drawings  McKee  745 Fifth Avenue, at 58th Street  Through Dec. 22
        The art world has its own version of the 1965 Newport Folk Festival, where Bob Dylan shocked audiences by performing on an electric rather than an acoustic guitar. In the autumn of 1970, Philip Guston unveiled a suite of figurative paintings at the Marlborough Gallery that broke with the reigning abstractionist mode. The response was as cataclysmic as it was when Mr. Dylan left the stage after three songs.
        Mr. Guston's about-face wasn't immediate, of course. Its evolution in drawing is traced here with 30 works created between 1950 and 1980. The earliest is an untitled drawing from 1950 in which Mr. Guston follows the example of his high school buddy Jackson Pollock, utilizing the automatic drawing of the Surrealists to create a squiggly ink-on-paper abstraction. (Mr. Guston had mostly resisted abstraction in the '40s.)
        The show jumps quickly to the late '60s. Here Mr. Guston's drawings of shoes, books, clocks and chairs reveal a renewed interest in cartoons (as a child he was enrolled in a cartooning correspondence course) and an allegiance to the humble artifacts of everyday life.
        The drawings don't demonstrate, as his paintings do, Mr. Guston's fervent political engagement, rekindled by the Vietnam War, although several resurrect the hooded figures prominent in his paintings of the Ku Klux Klan in the 1930s. In these works the hooded heads are ambiguous: menacing but comical, and sometimes even autobiographical. They also hold a new, sinister resonance for post-Abu Ghraib viewers.
        The last drawing in this staunchly linear installation is a pencil-on-paper work from 1980, the year Mr. Guston died. In it a hand grasps a big, curvy door handle, below which a skeleton key protrudes from a keyhole. The implication is obvious but apt. By the end of his life Mr. Guston had found a way to navigate between abstraction and representation, often accomplishing the seemingly impossible task of merging the two.
        MARTHA SCHWENDENER
      