
        Biomet, a major manufacturer of artificial hips and knees, said yesterday that it had agreed to a $10.9 billion buyout offer from a private investment consortium.
        The bid came from affiliates of the Blackstone Group, Goldman Sachs Capital Partners, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company and the Texas Pacific Group. Biomet said the private investment group was also expected to include Dane A. Miller, a co-founder of Biomet in 1977 and its longtime chief executive until he resigned in April, citing disagreements with the board.
        In a separate announcement, Biomet said that a board committee review of options-dating practices back to 1996 had uncovered numerous cases of backdating, which allowed recipients to buy shares at lower prices.
        The review, which was conducted by independent accountants, also found record-keeping shortcomings that made it hard to document what had happened. But Biomet said it had concluded that a majority of the questionable option grants -- and a majority of the 11 million shares involved -- went to people who were neither officers nor directors.
        The company, based in Warsaw, Ind., said it had notified the Chicago office of the Securities and Exchange Commission and had canceled the release of its second-quarter earnings report scheduled for tomorrow. It declined to predict how long it would take to sort out its books.
        Biomet said unnamed senior executives had been aware of the backdating ''though they may not have been aware of the accounting and legal ramifications of this practice.''
        While the accounting irregularities have prevented a final tally of profits for the quarter, Biomet said sales increased 5 percent over the year-earlier quarter, to $520.3 million. That fell short of Wall Street's average forecast of $527 million.
        The buyout bid amounts to $44 a share, slightly less than the highest prices bandied about in recent rumors that Biomet would merge with Smith & Nephew, a British orthopedics company. Smith & Nephew said in November that the two companies had been in talks but it said yesterday that those discussions had ended.
        Private equity investors see established orthopedics companies as good investments because the reconstructive implant business is benefiting from an aging population. Biomet sales in the recent quarter met expectations of high-single-digit growth in hip and knee implants -- the established core of the business -- while sales of wrist and shoulder implants rose 20 percent.
        Biomet and the investor group forecast that the buyout could close by the end of October. Biomet's shares fell as low as $40.96 before rallying to end at $41.59, down 41 cents. Analysts said the selling reflected expectations that no rival bids would emerge, and the wait for what amounts to a 4.8 percent premium on Friday's closing price of $42. ''You are talking about a very small return for a 10-month wait,'' said Raj Denhoy, who follows the orthopedics sector for Piper Jaffray & Company.
        Smith & Nephew's shares, by contrast, surged on the news, both in London and in the United States, where depository receipts representing the shares trade on the New York Stock Exchange. The receipts closed at $50.58, up $3.43, or nearly 7.3 percent. Many investors had worried that the British company would overpay for Biomet.
        Smith & Nephew's rise may also have been fed by speculation that private equity investors may now buy the British company and perhaps merge the two.
        ''This isn't a lot of money for this investment group,'' said Robin R. Young, an orthopedics industry consultant and market researcher who publishes the newsletter Orthopedics This Week. ''They could turn right around and go after Smith & Nephew.''
        Unlike the situation with Biomet, though, there has been no indication that the British company is for sale. Biomet announced it was considering all its strategic options in April, when it hired Morgan Stanley to advise it and Mr. Miller stepped down into a consulting role. Daniel P. Hann, who had been the general counsel, has served as interim president and chief executive since then.
        Many analysts had suggested that a combination of Biomet and Smith & Nephew made sense because it would make them roughly the same size in orthopedics as the three largest players -- Zimmer Holdings, Stryker and the DePuy Orthopaedics division of Johnson & Johnson.
      