
        New York Film Critics Honor 'United 93'
        The British director Paul Greengrass's ''United 93'' (with Becky London and Tom O'Rourke, above), the first Hollywood feature film to deal with 9/11, was named the year's best film yesterday by the New York Film Critics Circle. But Mr. Greengrass's account of the downing of the fourth and final plane hijacked by Islamist terrorists on 9/11 did not win the award for best director, which went to Martin Scorsese for ''The Departed,'' starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Matt Damon and Jack Nicholson in a tale of cops, gangsters, power and loyalty. Helen Mirren was chosen best actress for her portrayal of Queen Elizabeth II in ''The Queen,'' and Forest Whitaker was named best actor for his depiction of the despot Idi Amin in ''The Last King of Scotland.'' The prize for best foreign film went to a 1969 French film unseen in the United States until this year: Jean-Pierre Melville's ''Army of Shadows,'' about heroism and horror in the French resistance during the Nazi occupation in World War II. Jennifer Hudson was named best supporting actress for ''Dreamgirls,'' and Jackie Earle Haley was chosen best supporting actor for ''Little Children.'' Peter Morgan was cited for his screenplay for ''The Queen.'' George Miller's ''Happy Feet,'' the dancing penguin movie, was chosen best animated film, and Amy Berg's ''Deliver Us From Evil,'' a documentary about the sexual abuse scandals in the Roman Catholic Church, was named best nonfiction film. Founded in 1935, the New York Film Critics Circle, including critics from daily and weekly newspapers and magazines, will present its awards on Jan. 7 at the Supper Club in Manhattan. On Sunday, Clint Eastwood's ''Letters From Iwo Jima,'' the companion film to his ''Flags of Our Fathers,'' about the battle for Iwo Jima, was named the year's best film by the Los Angeles Film Critics Association, The Associated Press reported.
        Prince to Sing at Super Bowl
        Prince, a member of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, will follow in the footsteps of the Rolling Stones, Paul McCartney and Janet Jackson when he headlines the halftime show at the Super Bowl on Miami on Feb. 4, The Associated Press reported. The Super Bowl, to be televised by CBS, is annually television's highest-rated attraction. An estimated 141 million people watched last year's game, in which Pittsburgh beat Seattle 21 to 10.
      