
        In the basement, the outdated ventilation system leaves one room feeling like a sauna. But up on the second floor, gaps in the windows allow the cold wind to pierce through, provoking a little shiver. Cracks in the roof cast askew shadows of the four-story building onto the street. Waterbury, nicknamed the Brass City in the 1800s when it was the nation's leading manufacturer of brassware, lost its luster long ago. Now, City Hall itself is crumbling.
        Designed by Cass Gilbert -- who was also the architect for the Woolworth Building in Manhattan and other early 20th-century landmarks -- the Waterbury structure has become more symbol than shelter. Over the past several years, the mayor, the fire chief and the accountants have moved across the street, occupying office space in the onetime headquarters of a brass company.
        ''The place is a wreck,'' said Joseph A. Geary, the mayor's deputy chief of staff, as he stood among discarded records and rotting wood. ''Would you want to live in a place like this? Would you want to show this off to your neighbors? No way.''
        The Board of Aldermen decided on Monday night to order contractors and architects to come up with four plans on what to do with the building.
        Michael L. O'Connor, chairman of the Waterbury Development Corporation, a private business group, had presented the 15 aldermen with two options in recent weeks: spend more than $2 million to fix up the bottom floor, with no guarantees on how long the repairs would last, or scoot everyone out and start from scratch. Another option, quietly spoken, was to mothball the whole thing. Monday's move by the board, in essence, put off making any final decision.
        A crumbling City Hall is hardly Waterbury's only problem. Under previous administrations, the city of 107,000 people has often seemed synonymous with corruption and wrongdoing. After five years of financial oversight by the state, the city is gearing up to retake control of its budget in January.
        Former Mayor Philip A. Giordano is three years into a 37-year prison sentence after being convicted of violating the civil rights of two girls he sexually abused. And Waterbury was where the disgraced governor, John G. Rowland, came of age.
        Still, in recent times, an amiable mayor, Michael J. Jarjura, has managed to restore some pride, largely through the unglamorous duty of balancing budgets. Now that he has finished the figurative house cleaning, Mr. Jarjura wants to tackle the literal nitty-gritty.
        But it is no easy task. Last month, voters rejected a $48 million bond issue that would have paid for a major renovation of City Hall, including the demolition of the old Fire Department headquarters. Soon after, the fire chief warned that the top three floors of City Hall were too unstable for people to work there.
        Nobody quite knows how the building became quite so terrible. Each summer, the 200,000 tons of marble eroded little by little in the heat. The fountain in the atrium stopped working more than 10 years ago. Improvements were made piecemeal: putting new wiring in a rusty electrical box, for example. The window units never really kept the place cool.
        ''How can we be a couple weeks from 2007 and still be using window air-conditioners?'' an exasperated Mr. O'Connor asked on a recent tour.
        City Hall was already a wreck when, in 2005, a vandal entered the building and turned on a water pipe on the fourth floor. It was not until the next day, which was Super Bowl Sunday, that a firefighter heard the gushing and entered to find the waters cascading down the stairs.
        Things went downhill from there. The top floors were immediately abandoned, reams of old papers were left to collect mold and water stains streaked the walls with stripes like a zebra. The plaster chipped away in several corners of the building. The carpet was ripped off the floor in the aldermen's chambers long ago, leaving a yellowing concoction of concrete and grout.
        So even as the board debated the merits of restoring the building, the members could not bring themselves to actually meet inside it.
        ''I really don't see the point of doing something that just puts lipstick on the pig,'' said J. Paul Vance Jr., the president of the board. ''We've gotten long past the time where we can just wait and see. It's bad. We see that.''
        Others are less certain. Another alderman said the city could not afford to spend millions on a project just to ''pretty up'' City Hall. Several others said they would prefer to spend the minimum possible to do the basic work needed to make the building ready and safe for workers.
        With the threat of condemnation from the fire chief, the board has to take action. But repairs will not be inexpensive. Now, contractors and architects will spend the next month drawing up plans that could still end up costing the city more than $40 million -- not much less than the amount that voters rejected.
        But Mr. Geary, of the mayor's office, along with the other leaders pushing for grandeur, are rather wistful when they look at the plaque in the foyer. It is as though they are imagining the ghosts of Waterbury past walking through the doors.
        Passing the ornate script declaring completion in ''Anno Domini 1915,'' Mr. Geary wondered, ''Wouldn't this be nice to be really completed and have a City Hall to go with the city?''
        WATERBURY JOURNAL
      