
        The Knicks routed another team last night, and that was not even the oddest sight to be seen at Madison Square Garden. That honor went to Jerome James, the beefy backup center, who gleefully led a fast break, dished off to the rookie Renaldo Balkman, then got the ball back for a nifty dunk in the fourth quarter. There were chuckles in James's wake, and smiles along the Knicks' bench, where all the starters were sitting.
        It was that kind of rare evening for the Knicks, who backed the owner's vote of confidence in Coach Isiah Thomas with a 94-82 thumping of the Atlanta Hawks.
        Atlanta (8-13) was playing without Joe Johnson, the league's fourth-leading scorer, and its sixth man, Josh Childress. The Knicks (9-15) have been known to squander such opportunities, but not this time.
        They led by double digits for the final 16 minutes 53 seconds and pushed the lead to 30 points early in the fourth quarter -- the same margin they trailed by two nights earlier against Boston.
        With nothing left to accomplish, Thomas rested his starters and James -- with the Hall of Famer Magic Johnson sitting courtside -- got a chance to flash his point-guard skills.
        ''That was hilarious,'' center Eddy Curry said with a laugh. ''If I do that, he's going take me out, though.''
        The Knicks picked a good time for just their fourth rout of the season. A day earlier, the Garden chairman, James L. Dolan, stated that Thomas was secure for the rest of the season. The victory made Dolan's expression of faith look good.
        The statement was merely a reiteration of what Dolan said last June -- and what Thomas certainly knew -- but it could stem the speculation about a midseason firing.
        ''I'm comfortable with what he's saying and what he's asking,'' Thomas said before the game. When asked if he needed the reassurance, Thomas said, ''I don't think that way.''
        ''I work with the day I have, and I try to enjoy it and I try to live that day,'' he added. ''When tomorrow comes, I'm very thankful that I'm still here, living in the world for tomorrow.''
        On the court, Thomas saw a lot of encouraging signs: Stephon Marbury had 13 points and 6 assists and avoided getting booed. Curry pushed his streak of 20-point games to 11, finishing with 20 points and 9 rebounds. Jared Jeffries, starting his first game, was as active as advertised and collected 15 points, 7 rebounds and 3 steals in 24 minutes.
        At midcourt sat Johnson, one of Thomas's biggest rivals and closest friends. Given all Thomas has endured in recent weeks -- the losses, the boos, the chants of ''Fire Thomas'' -- Johnson seemed like a good omen.
        ''It's kind of like a big brother -- when you need him or when you don't expect him and it's a little turmoil, he just always seems to show up and say, 'I'm here,' '' Thomas said. ''It was very good seeing him. It's always special and good when he's in the house.''
        Thomas got an instant payoff from his latest lineup move. Jeffries, who returned from a broken wrist just two days earlier, was inserted at power forward, in place of David Lee. Thomas said he wanted Jeffries and Quentin Richardson -- his two best defenders -- on the court to start the game, in hopes of avoiding another bad start.
        Although it took a while for the rout to develop, it was immediately clear what Jeffries can do for the Knicks. He had a tip-in, two layups, a rebound and a steal in the first five minutes. He twice dove out of bounds chasing loose balls. He directed teammates on defense.
        ''He's a very special defender,'' Curry said. ''He's out there talking, he's got everybody in the right spots on defense, he pretty much runs our zone. He's a very smart player.''
        REBOUNDS
        In the view of the Garden chairman, James L. Dolan, Larry Brown hindered the development of the Knicks' rookies last season. Isiah Thomas would not echo the sentiment -- which Dolan expressed Tuesday -- but he would not dispute it either. ''I'm never going to disagree with anything Jim has to say,'' Thomas said. ''He's the owner and we all work for him.'' Forward David Lee, one of last season's rookies, made no effort to defend Brown, saying, ''I learned a lot last year from the tough times we went through.'' When asked what he learned from Brown, Lee said: ''He does a good job teaching fundamentals. But more than anything, I learned from just spending a year in the N.B.A. I can't tell you how much more comfortable I feel this year out there.'' ... Magic Johnson, sitting courtside at the invitation of his good friend Thomas, was predictably upbeat about the Knicks. Speaking to the MSG Network during the game, Johnson called Marbury ''one of the best open-court players'' in the N.B.A., called Eddy Curry ''the best low-post threat in the division,'' called Lee ''a hero'' and said the Knicks have ''one of the best benches in all of basketball.'' Johnson said the Knicks could win the Atlantic Division ''and make some noise in the playoffs,'' if Marbury can break out of his funk. ''I see a guy who's not playing loose and having fun,'' Johnson said. ''He's got to get back to that. So I'm going to have a talk with him after the game to get him going.'' ... The last Knick to score 20 points in at least 11 straight games was Patrick Ewing, who had a 13-game streak from April 10 to Nov. 12, 1994.
        Knicks 94, Hawks 82
      