
        Heavy fighting broke out near the headquarters of the transitional government of Somalia on Wednesday, as European diplomats were shuttling between rival leaders in yet another effort to avert an all-out war.
        According to United Nations officials, the Islamist clerics who control Mogadishu, Somalia's battle-scarred seaside capital, launched an offensive on two fronts against the transitional government's forces.
        Using pickup trucks bristling with antiaircraft guns, the Islamists struck at dawn and blasted their way into two towns near the inland city of Baidoa, where the transitional government is based. But fortunes reversed by midday, United Nations officials said, with the transitional government's troops -- aided by Ethiopian soldiers -- driving the Islamists out of their territory.
        ''We have defended our positions and pushed them back,'' said Salad Ali Jelle, the transitional government's deputy defense minister.
        Casualty estimates ranged from 5 to 140 dead, a toll that analysts feared could set off a major confrontation.
        But much of the information was conflicting, with both sides claiming victory -- and blaming the other for firing the first shot.
        Playing down the episode, Sheik Hassan Dahir Aweys, the leader of the Islamist forces, called the combat ''a small incident.'' He told reporters in Mogadishu, ''The war has not started.''
        In fact, Sheik Aweys said, his group has agreed to return to peace talks with the transitional government.
        He spoke Wednesday afternoon after meeting with Louis Michel, the European Union commissioner for development and aid. Mr. Michel spent the day traveling between Baidoa and Mogadishu, trying to get the two sides to agree to more negotiations as their troops pounded each other with machine-gun fire.
        Mr. Michel called the commitment to peace talks a ''breakthrough,'' but transitional government officials did not seem so sure.
        ''Who are we kidding?'' Abdirizak Adam Hassan, chief of staff for the transitional president, said by telephone from Baidoa. ''The Islamists' actions have been totally contradictory to their words.'' He added, ''Right now, as I speak, I can hear their mortars falling all around us.''
        For the past several months, Somalia has been on a seesaw of war fears and peace dreams. After 15 years of unabated anarchy, the population is clearly sick of fighting. But the leadership of the country is unstably divided between the transitional government, which enjoys support from outside Somalia but very little from within it, and the Islamists, a popular grass-roots movement that sprang from clan-based courts.
        United Nations officials have said that several Arab states and Eritrea are supplying arms to the Islamists, and Ethiopia has admitted that it sent some troops to back up the transitional government. Though Ethiopian officials continue to deny that they have large numbers of soldiers inside Somalia, United Nations officials said that Ethiopian forces were the decisive factor in Wednesday's battles.
        The transitional government's soldiers, a loose mix of young militiamen loyal to various and often rivaling politicians, ''have gained the upper hand with the help of Ethiopians,'' said one United Nations official.
        The presence of Ethiopian troops may have provoked the fighting in the first place. The Islamists consider the Ethiopians invaders. They have held fiery rallies in their stronghold of Mogadishu, vowing to wage a holy war against Ethiopia, a country with a historic Christian identity (Somalia is almost purely Muslim). The fact that Ethiopia is a close ally of the United States, which many Somalis revile because of the failed American-led efforts in the mid-1990s to quell Somalia's violence, makes Ethiopia even more suspect.
        Last week, the Islamists issued an ultimatum to Ethiopia to pull its forces out. That ultimatum expired Tuesday without Ethiopian troops budging. Some analysts wondered whether the rank-and-file Islamist troops might have decided on their own to attack Baidoa right after the ultimatum expired, despite recent conciliatory remarks from some of their leaders.
      