
        With a grand jury expected to decide this week whether to indict State Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi for using state workers as chauffeurs and personal aides for his wife, Mr. Hevesi's lawyers have entered negotiations with the Albany County district attorney's office, a law enforcement official said yesterday.
        The negotiations could lead to some sort of settlement or a guilty plea, said the person, who was granted anonymity in order to describe the private talks. It was unclear whether such a resolution would include an agreement that Mr. Hevesi would step down from office, as some Democrats in Albany have speculated, the person said.
        A spokesman for Mr. Hevesi declined to comment on the matter.
        Rachel McEneny, a spokeswoman for the Albany County district attorney, David Soares, said that she could not comment on a grand jury investigation. ''The investigation is moving forward,'' she said. ''We hope to have this resolved by the end of the month.''
        The investigation by the Albany County district attorney into whether Mr. Hevesi's use of state workers to drive his wife was a crime is potentially the most serious of the various inquiries into Mr. Hevesi's actions that have been conducted in recent months.
        Mr. Hevesi's legal troubles began this fall, when his little-known Republican opponent in the comptroller's race, J. Christopher Callaghan, called a hot line that Mr. Hevesi had set up for citizens to report fraud and abuse to say that Mr. Hevesi used a state worker to drive his wife. He called reporters, too. Somewhat to Mr. Callaghan's surprise, Mr. Hevesi admitted to using the driver. But Mr. Hevesi said he had done so for security reasons, adding that he had forgotten to reimburse the state for the nonsecurity related work.
        An investigation by the State Ethics Commission found that there was no security threat to justify his use of a state driver, and accused Mr. Hevesi, a Democrat, of breaking a civil law. A special counsel appointed by Gov. George E. Pataki, a Republican, found that there was a valid legal basis for seeking Mr. Hevesi's removal from office, but stopped short of recommending the action, saying that the road forward was murky.
        In November, Mr. Hevesi was re-elected by a comfortable margin. He indicated that he intended to serve the four-year term he had just won.
        But Governor-elect Eliot Spitzer, a Democrat, has since made it clear that he will almost certainly ask the State Senate to consider removing Mr. Hevesi from office when his term begins next month, people involved in the discussions have said.
        Such removal proceedings could prompt lengthy litigation over whether an official can be removed from office for conduct in a previous term after being re-elected by voters who were aware of the issue, several lawyers have said.
        An inquiry by the state attorney general's office found that Mr. Hevesi owed the state more than $206,000 in reimbursements for the driver's services -- more than twice the $83,000 that the comptroller's office initially said that he owed. That inquiry -- which Mr. Spitzer recused himself from -- found that the state worker had done much more than drive Mr. Hevesi's wife, Carol. It found he had also helped her with physical therapy.
        In recent weeks, officials and others who have spoken with Mr. Hevesi have said that he had indicated that he intended to fight to serve his term. But some have said that an indictment by the district attorney's office could change the calculus.
      