
        Daisuke Matsuzaka arrived in Los Angeles from Japan on Saturday and has been meeting with his agent, Scott Boras, to discuss his uncertain future ever since. Matsuzaka's dream is to pitch in the major leagues, and Boras is talking about that possibility with the Boston Red Sox, who paid $51.1 million for the rights to negotiate with Matsuzaka.
        But with Thursday's midnight deadline creeping closer, the Red Sox still cannot predict if Matsuzaka will be smiling and holding up one of their jerseys at a news conference in Boston anytime soon. Boras and Red Sox officials are in disagreement about Matsuzaka's value, which means the listless negotiations will undoubtedly drag until the final hours.
        If the two sides do not agree on a contract figure, Matsuzaka's Japanese team, the Seibu Lions, will not receive any of the $51.1 million the Red Sox posted and Matsuzaka will have to return to Japan for 2007. Matsuzaka, who has told Boras he wants to pitch in the United States next year, would have to wait at least another year before he regained the chance to do that.
        ''If there is no deal, then all bets are off,'' said Lou Melendez, the vice president for international operations for Major League Baseball. ''They'd have to post him again next year, because he can't be a free agent for two more years.''
        Boras, who spoke to a group of mostly Japanese reporters in Newport Beach, Calif., last night, said that John Henry, Larry Lucchino and Theo Epstein, the Red Sox' three top executives, were in town to meet with him last night and today. Boras said Matsuzaka is ''worth well in excess of $100 million'' and added that Matsuzaka alone would make the decision about his future.
        ''One thing is clear: D-Mat will someday be a major league player,'' Boras said. ''We have further negotiating to do. The deadline's not here in five minutes. The parties do understand what the player's value is in the free-agent system.''
        Japanese reporters said it would be awkward for Matsuzaka if he had to return to Japan. Matsuzaka has already said goodbye to his country, and the financially strapped Lions were expecting a significant payday after posting him. If Boras requests as much as $15 million a year and the Red Sox counter with $10 million, people in Japan would wonder why the lower amount was not enough.
        ''Nobody in Japan is expecting him to come back because the negotiations broke down,'' said Yasuko Yanagita, a reporter for the Hochi Shimbun. ''I don't think this is only for the Japanese culture. But in Japan, someone asking for 'money, money, money' does not leave a good impression.''
        As both sides have tried to find ways to make the deal more favorable to them, there has been speculation that Boras could let the deadline pass so the Red Sox no longer hold negotiating rights. He could then attempt to buy out Matsuzaka's contract with Seibu.
        If the Lions knew they were not getting $51.1 million from the Red Sox, they might be willing to take half that from Boras. Boras could then market Matsuzaka as a free agent, and the pitcher would stand to make much more than he would get from the Red Sox now. But Melendez said that was not an option.
        ''The Commissioner's office would not recognize that free agency, and the Japanese commissioner's office is in agreement,'' Melendez said.
        According to the agreement between Major League Baseball and Nippon Professional Baseball, a Japanese team must wait a calendar year to expose a player to the posting system if the player and the American team do not agree on a deal.
        If no deal is reached, Matsuzaka, 26, would have to wait until Nov. 1, 2007 to be posted again. He cannot become an unrestricted free agent until after the 2008 season.
        Boras, who says that the posting system is flawed and that the Lions should not benefit so much more than his client, could attempt to challenge the process in court.
        ''For that system to really operate, there has to be participation among all the parties,'' Boras said at the winter meetings in Orlando, Fla., last week. ''If the situation is looked at in one direction or selfishly by any of the parties, then it's not going to work. But if there's cooperation and participation by all parties, then there's an opportunity for the system to have a dynamic that works.''
        Other potential loopholes had previously been raised. Lucchino, the Red Sox' president, went to Japan to meet with the Lions and discuss a possible agreement. That prompted speculation that the Lions would pay Matsuzaka some of the posting fee in exchange for him accepting a lower contract from the Red Sox. But Melendez said there could not be any agreements that circumvented the posting process.
        BASEBALL
      