
        From the street, the building across from the auto body shop and the gas station didn't look like much -- just a weathered, white-frame, three-story building with Florian and Bob's Dollhouse Nonstop Go Go on the bottom floor.
        But to Ana Garcia, her grown daughter, Ana Martinez, and the rest of the family of Mexican immigrants on the third floor, it felt like a penthouse.
        There were the treasured family pictures on the wall -- Ms. Garcia's dad in his suit, her mom in that special pink blouse. There was the $12.99 plastic Christmas tree Ms. Garcia dragged out every year, and the decorations she bought at the 99-cent store and reused every year: the snowman, the Christmas bells and the rest.
        There was plenty of music -- often Ms. Martinez's 4-year-old daughter, Mariana, singing Stevie Wonder's ''I Just Called to Say I Love You'' with one of those electric keyboards. From the hallway, you could smell the tacos and enchiladas cooking.
        Ms. Garcia had been there seven years, and for poor people trying to establish a sense of stability and roots, that can seem like a lifetime.
        Over the years, changes occurred: her father died of a heart attack six years ago at the age of 78.
        Now it is Ms. Garcia, 45, and her 9-year-old son, Yovany; Ms. Martinez, 30; her husband, Erasmo Luna; and Mariana. Ms. Martinez works at a day care center. Mr. Luna does construction work. On the long climb up the hill that is the immigrant experience, they were nowhere near the top, but at least they had a toehold well above the bottom.
        And then they didn't.
        It was a week ago Thursday, one of the few frigid nights, that the landlord came banging and kicking on the door sometime around midnight, yelling ''Fire! Fire!'' They got up, saw nothing, smelled nothing, and thought groggily that maybe it was a mistake. It wasn't. They frantically scooped up Mariana, grabbed some clothes and the plastic bag of photos and documents from the closet and clambered down the fire escape.
        And then they shivered in the cold, watching the flames lick the night sky and the black smoke billow away, like the life they had built from scratch.
        You read the stories all the time and wonder: What do they do now? How do poor people, usually without insurance, without savings, pick up and start over?
        And of course there's no plan; just whatever works. They spent the night of the fire at the hospital being checked for smoke inhalation. Then they stayed with Ms. Garcia's sister in Newark, sleeping on the floor, using coats as pillows, Yovany trying to stay awake as the watchman in case there was another fire.
        Now they're staying in a basement apartment that one of Mr. Luna's employers is letting them use. Two churches and the two schools the children attend have contributed clothing and food.
        They got $785 from the Red Cross for food and clothing, but it goes fast when you don't have a fork or a chair, Yovany's Game Boy, Mr. Luna's tools.
        So there's no plastic tree and no decorations from the 99-cent store in the basement apartment. But there's no despair either.
        Ms. Martinez has a hacking cough -- the result of the smoke, she thinks. Ms. Garcia hurt her back and shoulder at work a year ago and was bedridden for three months.
        You're not sure how they make this work, but they figure they came here with next to nothing, so maybe they're just back where they started, not in some utterly unknown and desolate place.
        ''I came to this country for something better,'' Ms. Garcia said. ''So I have my life. I have my two arms. I have all my fingers, my feet, my legs. So life never stops. Life continues. So I thank God that my family is O.K., and I think maybe something better is coming. Something better is coming.''
        They all remember the night at the old apartment when Mariana first found magic in the moon. The place was all windows, with a view of not much more than the desultory streets of a struggling town.
        But one evening Mariana, at age 2, stood mesmerized watching a fat, full moon, shimmering like the Star of Bethlehem over Irvington, and it was as if everyone saw it for the first time as well.
        They're hoping the New Year brings a bed and chairs, spoons and tools, and a roof over their heads. But finding a place that feels like home, where the $12.99 Christmas tree could feel like an heirloom, where Mariana could find magic in the moon the way life was back at the apartment above Florian and Bob's Dollhouse Nonstop Go Go, well, that's the really hard part.
        OUR TOWNS E-mail: peappl@nytimes.com
      