
        The mood of the Nets on Monday night could be summed up in a play that no one saw coming late in the third quarter.
        There was Jason Kidd, one of the best passers of his time, streaking down the middle of the lane, his eyes on a lob pass from Vince Carter, one of the best dunkers of his time.
        It was a role reversal fit for a sketch comedy routine and one that ended with the Memphis Grizzlies coming away with the ball after Kidd's fingertips barely made it as high as the rim.
        ''He asked for it,'' Carter said. ''He's like, 'Yeah, I'm going to go down the lane for a lob.' ''
        And where, exactly, was Kidd planning to catch the ball?
        ''Above the rim,'' he said. ''That was the plan. It didn't work out.''
        In the midst of their early-season struggles, the Nets have had few such opportunities for fun in the middle of a game. But Carter and Kidd had earned the right to attempt something so ridiculous, if not because of their reputations as N.B.A. stars, then because they were the main reason the Nets had a 24-point lead over the Grizzlies at the time.
        Carter, who hit a team-record and career-high nine 3-pointers, and Kidd, who recorded the 79th triple-double of his career, proved that the answer to the Nets' problems was in their stars. They led the Nets to a 105-92 victory over the Grizzlies, snapping a three-game losing streak.
        Richard Jefferson had 16 points on 7-for-9 shooting. The game was a preview of what the Nets could be if they were to flex their All-Star talent consistently.
        ''It's our job to get it started,'' said Carter, who scored 37 points. ''We have to bring the energy, we have to be the verbal leaders, we have to do it all if we want to win. But at the same time, it's everybody's job to come out here and just contribute.''
        The Nets (8-12) got another energetic performance off the bench from power forward Mikki Moore, who finished with 10 points. He saw significant playing time in part because the starting power forward, Jason Collins, left the game late in the first quarter with a mild concussion after a collision with Grizzlies forward Stromile Swift. Collins did not return.
        As a team, the Nets combined for 15 3-pointers, tying a franchise record.
        Kidd, who had 12 points, 13 assists and 10 rebounds, is now in sole possession of third on the career triple-double list, surpassing Wilt Chamberlain. He trails Oscar Robertson and Magic Johnson.
        ''I think Wilt, his name alone talks historically; it's huge,'' Kidd said. ''He changed the game of basketball. To be able to pass somebody who had an impact on the game, it's a great honor.''
        Carter's handprints were all over this game.
        He hit his first five 3-point attempts. By halftime, he had seven 3-pointers, tying the Nets' record for 3s in a game.
        The Nets opened the game by outscoring the Grizzlies, 12-2. They led by 25-10 after the first quarter, the fewest points they have allowed in a quarter this season.
        The Nets also had a hot start Saturday night against the Boston Celtics, racing to an 18-0 lead. But the Nets squandered that advantage in the second quarter and went on to lose on a buzzer beater by Paul Pierce.
        On Monday night, Memphis crawled back to within 9 points in the third quarter, but never really threatened. That was in large part because the Nets fed off Carter's energy for the entire game.
        Carter tied and set his personal best for 3-pointers in a game in a 31-second span midway through the third quarter.
        Early in the second half, Carter showed fierce defense against the Grizzlies swingman Dahntay Jones. Carter swiped the ball from Jones as he dribbled on the perimeter. Jones recovered the ball, but when he shot, Carter had a hand in his face to force the miss.
        ''Vince Carter was very, very active,'' Nets Coach Lawrence Frank said. ''He did a great job both on and off the ball.''
        Carter finished with four steals.
        For all the acclaim Carter received for his hot outside shooting, he made his trademark clear late in the third quarter.
        On a fast break, Carter soared, cocked his right hand back and made a thunderous dunk over the 6-foot-8 Mike Miller, drawing perhaps the biggest ovation of the evening and giving the Nets a 26-point lead, their largest of the game.
        The Nets can breathe a momentary sigh of relief; they avoided a home loss to the Grizzlies (5-16), the team with the worst record in the Western Conference. But the Nets need more than one victory over a lesser opponent to prove they truly have turned a corner.
        PRO BASKETBALL
      