
        The Legislature began considering changes to New York's vast network of town and village courts on Thursday, hearing testimony from judicial officials, prosecutors, local justices and court monitoring groups. Some insisted that a drastic overhaul was long overdue, while others said reforms already under way would suffice.
        Among the most powerful statements made was a prosecutor's account of what he called ''jaw-dropping moments'' of judicial incompetence in the New York City suburbs. Michael E. Bongiorno, the district attorney of Rockland County, told a State Assembly hearing that cases simply vanished in the local courts for lack of attention, that some justices did not know how to conduct trials, and that some even committed crimes or violated ethical rules.
        The testimony came as lawmakers began examining the state's system of 1,277 town and village courts, also known as justice courts. The courts, which date to the Colonial era, have been criticized for nearly a century as poorly supervised, inadequately funded and sometimes hostile to constitutional rights. The State Senate plans to hold a hearing next month, and last month the state's top court officials announced that they would begin an ambitious series of reforms.
        But Mr. Bongiorno, the president of the New York State District Attorneys Association, told the legislators that those reforms ''do not go far enough in providing a long-term solution to the litany of serious shortcomings that plague the justice courts.''
        The court officials' plan included measures to double the justices' initial training to two weeks of classroom courses, to require the recording of court proceedings and to supervise the justices more closely. But it did not deal with the issues that many of the courts' critics see as their deepest flaws: that three-quarters of the justices are not lawyers and that even though the courts are part of the state judicial system, they are financed by the towns and villages.
        The hearing, a joint effort by the Assembly Judiciary and Codes Committees, was called to examine whether the Legislature needs to consider reforms that go far beyond those included in the court officials' plan. The session was called after The New York Times detailed the courts' troubled record in a series of articles in September.
        Mr. Bongiorno's descriptions of problems in Rockland County challenged a common defense of the justice courts: that injustices occur rarely, and generally only in the most isolated rural communities, not in the populous suburbs.
        Still, others at the hearing argued that the courts' failings were aberrations, and that the judicial officials' approach was adequate to modernize the 300-year-old system.
        Carrie A. O'Hare, a justice in Columbia County who is not a lawyer, said legislators should not focus on the credentials of the justices. She said most nonlawyer justices performed admirably. ''There are a lot of good judges out there,'' Justice O'Hare said.
        David O. Fuller Jr., the president of the justices' organization, the State Magistrates Association, said he welcomed the reforms by state court officials. But he urged lawmakers not to make any other major changes. He said the justices' knowledge of their communities was invaluable, and those who are not lawyers ''know a lot of things lawyers don't know.'' As an example, he mentioned two subjects relevant to small-town court cases: ''Trucks and game laws.''
        The state's chief administrative judge, Jonathan Lippman, defended the court officials' plan -- which he helped draft -- saying it dealt with the most immediate needs of a system that required far greater resources than the towns and villages provide. Some justices lack a proper courtroom, a bench or even a gavel, and some are paid as little as $3,000 a year for the part-time job.
        Judge Lippman said his agency, the Office of Court Administration, was moving promptly to fix what it could while lawmakers considered whether more substantial changes were required. Taking over the expense of running the justice courts, he said, could cost the state hundreds of millions of dollars.
        He and other judicial officials have avoided expressing an opinion about whether broader changes are necessary. But under questioning from some Assembly members yesterday, the judge conceded that he thought ''obviously it would be better if everyone was trained in the law.''
        The lawmakers were evidently undecided on that issue. Joseph R. Lentol, a Brooklyn Democrat who is chairman of the Assembly's Codes Committee, noted that state laws had become increasingly complex and that ''there appears to be a real lack of criminal justice training and expertise on our justice courts.'' But he said had not yet concluded whether justices should be required to be lawyers.
        But Daniel J. O'Donnell, a Democrat from the Upper West Side of Manhattan, said he had been shocked by a few visits to justice courts around the state.
        ''The people who have the power to incarcerate people,'' he said, ''have to be attorneys who might have been taught something about the U.S. Constitution.''
      