
        Two spacewalking astronauts used jury-rigged tools, ingenuity and muscle yesterday to coax balky solar panels to fold up into their containers on the International Space Station. The exacting effort took care of the major piece of unfinished business for this 12-day mission of the shuttle Discovery.
        With innumerable starts, stops and tweaks, Capt. Robert L. Curbeam Jr. of the Navy and Christer Fuglesang, a Swede from the European Space Agency, helped a set of arrays, which when fully extended stretched about 115 feet, fold themselves like pleated blinds and fit back into the ''blanket boxes'' in which they made the trip to space.
        The spacewalk began shortly after 2 p.m. Eastern time. The folding operation required the astronauts to move panels painstakingly along a frayed guide wire, to free up stuck grommets, pry panels apart and tug wires into the proper position and, occasionally, to grab the array structure and give it a good shake.
        It was careful craftsmanship more than 200 miles above the Earth, and the astronauts used pliers and scrapers wrapped with tape to provide insulation against possible electric shock.
        When, after five hours of work, the images from the astronauts' helmet cameras showed the folded panels sliding gently into their boxes, relieved applause broke out in the mission control room.
        Captain Curbeam then announced that he had ''one little bad piece of news,'' saying that he noticed one guide wire that had not completely retracted, and was ''kind of looped over.'' He spent a half-hour examining, and finally tugging the wire into place so that it would not present a snag hazard or scrape the delicate glass panels.
        By 7:45, about five and a half hours after the spacewalk began, the automatic latches slipped into place to lock the boxes.
        The main goal of the mission is rewiring the International Space Station so it can begin drawing power from a new solar array that was installed on the side of the station on the previous mission. The new array rotates like a paddlewheel to face the Sun continuously. That array's power replaces the balky solar array, which sat atop the station as a temporary power source.
        To start rotating the new array, one-half of the old array had to be retracted; if not, the new arrays would strike it. The NASA plan was to retract one-half of the array completely on this mission and to retract the other half on a mission next March. After it was locked back in its boxes, the array could be moved on a later mission to a new position on the side of the station.
        Mission managers had hoped that the array would retract without hands-on help, as it was designed to do. But the array had stayed extended in its temporary position for six years, far longer than the original station construction plans called for. NASA officials said going into the mission that they were worried that the panels would not properly retract.
        The partial retraction last week did provide the clearance that was needed to start up the rotating array and allowed the astronauts to conduct the two spacewalks that successfully rewired the station.
        But mission managers still hoped to retract the array before the repair crew, especially the highly experienced Captain Curbeam, headed home. And so managers added a fourth spacewalk. Captain Curbeam, by leading all four, set a NASA record for the most spacewalks by an astronaut in a single mission.
        The Discovery will return to Earth as early as Friday just before 4 p.m. Eastern time. Before then astronauts will conduct a final inspection of the shuttle's delicate external tiles and panels to see whether any damage occurred on the flight from orbital debris.
        In an evening news conference, Kirk Shireman, NASA's deputy space station program manager, said the fourth spacewalk was especially risky, since most spacewalks are planned and practiced for years. This one came together in a couple of days, he noted, with improvised tools and an array that ''was not intended to be touched with tools or hands.''
      