
        AS soon as Thanksgiving is over, the students at Millburn Regional Day School start asking their teachers when the Holiday Express troupe is going to make its annual stop.
        ''It's amazing, year after year, to see this happen,'' said June Zabchin, an administrator at the school, choking back tears earlier this month during a freewheeling musical program that took up the better part of two hours in the school gymnasium.
        One girl in a wheelchair, her eyes squeezed shut, clapped with great effort to ''Feliz Navidad.'' A boy in a padded helmet danced fitfully with a teacher to a rocked-up rendition of ''Deck the Halls.''
        ''They get the kids up,'' Ms. Zabchin said. ''They get them dancing.''
        Watching the show -- or event, as Holiday Express's founder, Tim McLoone, of Little Silver, calls the routine -- it is easy to understand why. His not-for-profit group puts on 50 shows for charity a season across New Jersey and occasionally beyond its borders for organizations badly in need of holiday cheer.
        The Holiday Express players are decidedly hands on: Amy Broza, a huge-haired, ebullient singer who plays with Mr. McLoone in the rock band Tim McLoone & the Shirleys, shared her microphone with several of the 100 disabled 3- to 21-year-olds during the recent performance at Millburn. And when one of the dozen musicians onstage was not busy pounding drums or playing a guitar, he was zipping into a Grinch or Rudolph costume and high-fiving the hyped-up crowd.
        Mr. McLoone, 58, started Holiday Express in 1993 while working for the New Jersey Nets. ''We had a feed-the-homeless program going on in Newark on Christmas Eve, a Nets program; I liked being there,'' he said before taking his seat at the keyboards at Millburn Regional, a regular Holiday Express stop since 2000.
        He liked it so much that he recruited musician friends to join him, he said, adding rock 'n' roll to the annual buffet. Then came his fateful words to his friends: ''Do you want to do more?''
        Now Holiday Express is an organization with 400 volunteers operating out of a Tinton Falls warehouse. Sixty of the helpers, most of them from the Jersey Shore, are professional musicians, who audition for a rotating spot in the band.
        Though Bruce Springsteen and Jon Bon Jovi did not audition, both have pitched in. Mr. Bon Jovi solicited food donations for a Newark homeless shelter last year. And Mr. Springsteen, whom Mr. McLoone says he has known forever -- ''When I was a kid, his aunt used to tell me, 'You've got to hire my nephew for your band!' and I'd say, 'Great, Dora, sure' '' -- has in the past arrived unannounced at soup kitchens to perform.
        ''You never know,'' was Mr. McLoone's answer to whether such high-profile friends would appear this season.
        More important to him, he said, was determining which organizations would be included on next year's list. He said the priority locations were those that otherwise received little or no attention and whose residents might be considered difficult audiences. Thus, Holiday Express will do rounds this year for residents at the nine state developmental centers that deal with mental illness or substance abuse.
        Forty of this year's sites will be on the itinerary again next year, and 10 new locations will be added.
        The typical audiences at Holiday Express shows are initially resistant to the good cheer and high volume, Mr. McLoone said. But by the end of the show, hesitation usually gives way to dancing in the aisles and singing along, at least by a few of those in attendance.
        ''My way of paying my volunteers,'' he said, ''is having them say, 'Boy, that was hard, but I'm glad we were there,' when they get back on the bus.''
        ENTERTAINMENT
      