
        Patrick Michael Ward's is the face that many visitors to New York City see smiling at them in photographs they take back to their homes around the world. He is the police officer who guards St. Patrick's Cathedral, the man in a blue uniform before a limestone and marble church facade with each black shoe planted in a different institution.
        There he is, Officer Ward: a former military policeman in the Army, the officer with the big hazel eyes, hair cut short, and a black and silver mustache like a wire brush. Officer Ward: Jean and Thomas Ward's son, easy with a laugh, still remembers his mother's catechism lessons, wears his uncle Edward Murphy's shield (No. 19712) and keeps a Mass card for Cardinal John J. O'Connor tucked inside his hat.
        The police world and the Roman Catholic world are heavy with history. They are parallel societies whose roots run deep; both are hierarchical and ritualistic. Officer Ward's radio crackles with calls from the precinct station, Midtown North. The radio chatter mingles with the church organ's religious hymns. He keeps a list of soup kitchens and shelters for the homeless in his memo book.
        Officer Ward, 41, is part of the ''Saint Pat's portable,'' one of four officers assigned to the church post. A police officer since 1994, he works the day tour, from 7 a.m. to 3 p.m., Sundays through Thursdays, in a post he has had since Jan. 10, 2004.
        ''I'm taking care of God's house,'' he said on Tuesday morning, speaking, as he sometimes does, out of the side of his mouth as he stood in the chilly air outside the church.
        It was six days until Christmas. Around the corner, the lights of the Rockefeller Center Christmas tree were shining. Ice skaters moved to music blaring from speakers. Entire families collided on the sidewalk. A pole for a bus stop sign was decorated like a candy cane, and the air was heavy with the frenzy of the shopping season.
        Officer Ward sees the masses, in winter coats and mittens, and hears their questions punctuate the holiday bustle: Where is F. A. O. Schwarz? The Plaza Hotel? Central Park, please? Saks Fifth Avenue?
        At Christmastime, he can feel like the public face of the Police Department, standing as its ''palace guard,'' on Fifth Avenue. It is an honor, he said, one he never imagined as a kid growing up in East Meadow, on Long Island. He said he cannot keep prayers from running through his head sometimes. They did last year when his mom was battling bladder cancer.
        ''I did a lot of praying then,'' he said. ''A lot of praying.''
        On the day before her surgery on April 19, 2005, Cardinal Edward M. Egan gave Officer Ward a set of wooden rosary beads for his mother. The surgery was a success; so far, the cancer has not returned. ''Thank God,'' Officer Ward said.
        Other times, others minister to his spiritual needs. When a middle-aged man choked a bank teller across the street from the church a couple of years ago, Officer Ward helped grab him. The victim, a woman, returned with a gift: a card with the police officer's prayer to St. Michael, the patron saint of the police.
        ''She came over here and said, 'Hey, I'm praying for you,' '' Officer Ward said. ''We see her all the time.'' He put the prayer card in his hat with the cardinal's image.
        On Tuesday, a group of 12 boys, fifth graders from St. Ignatius, a nativity school in Hunts Point, the Bronx, came to visit the cathedral for a tour. Officer Ward tagged along.
        ''We couldn't do without Pat here,'' said Ian Dowdiny, a church sacristan.
        Officer Ward has not been present for some of the more notorious recent events at the cathedral: in 2001, a man tried to handcuff himself to Cardinal Egan during New Year's Day Mass; a year later, a Brooklyn man entered the cathedral rectory, waved a .357 Magnum at a priest and shot himself in the chin, dying days later; in 2002, a man and a woman were arrested for having sex in a side entrance to the cathedral as part of a radio stunt on the Roman Catholic Feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin.
        ''I left about 10 minutes before it happened,'' Officer Ward said. ''I guess I'm blessed.''
        There have been parades and protests and several midnight Masses on Christmas Eves, including one last year that his wife, Catherine Quinn Ward, a physical therapist, attended while he was on duty.
        Back inside the church, the little tour with the officer tagging along walked to the Nativity scene, on the East 51st Street side. The boys asked questions. Officer Ward watched closely. Mr. Dowdiny said he would show the boys the place where the bodies of some deceased church elders are kept. ''Boys always like going into the crypt,'' he said.
        Officer Ward had gone to that very spot moments earlier, noting the names of some of the famous archbishops of New York from the past: Hughes, McCloskey, Corrigan, Farley, Hayes, Spellman, Cooke, O'Connor. ''Cardinal O'Connor was a good friend to the cops,'' he said. ''As is Cardinal Egan.''
        The tour group made its way past the high altar. As Officer Ward turned on his heels to follow them to the bronze doors below the altar, the church's organs, as if on cue, sounded as noon Mass began.
        MIDTOWN JOURNAL
      