
        Auburn University does not plan to forward information from an internal audit to the National Collegiate Athletic Association, a university spokesman said. The audit showed that a grade for a scholarship athlete was changed without the knowledge of the student's professor.
        The athlete was not identified because of privacy laws. A New York Times article published Sunday showed that the grade was changed from an incomplete to an A in the final semester, allowing the athlete to graduate.
        In that semester, the student received A's in four classes that did not require attendance. The grade change was made without the permission of the professor, who did not recall even meeting the student, and it nudged the student's grade-point average above the 2.0 needed to graduate.
        ''This is not an athletic issue,'' said the spokesman, Brian Keeter. ''The N.C.A.A. has not requested this report. We've provided a previous one to them. If they ask us to do for this, we would. But this is an academic issue.''
        When asked how an issue involving an athlete's grade change was not an athletic issue, Keeter said, ''This is not an athletic issue.''
        The N.C.A.A. president, Myles Brand, said in an interview yesterday that he had read the Times article but could not comment on specifics. He did applaud Auburn for conducting an internal audit, then added: ''The second point is that academic fraud is, if not the worst, one of the worst offenses that an institution can commit. I mean that as a general comment. I won't comment on any particular institution.''
        Keeter said that the audit was expected to reach the Auburn president, Edward R. Richardson, this week. The audit will include recommendations from the university provost. Keeter said that Richardson would not comment until he read the report, but Keeter said he expected ''substantial news'' to come out of the report.
        Keeter also stressed that there were now systems in place at the university to prevent a student-athlete from taking four classes that do not require attendance. The student's three other A's that semester were in courses taught by Professor Thomas Petee in a directed-readings format, a one-on-one learning style similar to independent study.
        After revelations in The Times in July that Petee taught up to 152 of these one-on-one courses in a semester, Auburn overhauled its directed-readings policies. Petee and another department head resigned their positions in the wake of the article.
        The question now is who changed the grade and how a student whom the professor, Paul Starr, could never recall meeting could receive an A in one of his courses.
        The report that Auburn has already forwarded to the N.C.A.A. reveals that Petee changed 55 grades from January 2003 to the spring of 2006, more than double the amount of the average faculty member in the sociology department. Although much of the information in the report is divided between athletes and nonathletes, the report does not reveal what percentage of grades changed belonged to athletes.
        ''I'm certain that there is an explanation for that from those that put that report together,'' Keeter said. ''I will have to get in touch with them to have that answer.''
        Vanderbilt's chancellor, Gordon Gee, said Auburn was another example of the problems caused when athletic departments are run separately from the university.
        ''I applaud them for having fixed the problems,'' said Gee, who has dissolved the traditional structure of the athletic department at Vanderbilt and blended it with the rest of the university. ''I also think the discussion needs to continue, why that culture existed and what we as universities have to do to prevent that culture. That's not just an Auburn problem. That becomes a lot of problems for a lot of us.''
        COLLEGES
      