
        Last Christmas, I took my grandchildren to ''The Nutcracker,'' a ballet I love. My enjoyment was severely marred by the appearance of a black snowflake and then, even worse, a black Snow King. The aesthetic incongruity was inconceivable. The entire ballet was spoiled. It is analogous to a one-legged midget playing Tarzan. Does this make me a racist?
        Name withheld, Sewell, N.J.
        This does make you a racist -- not in the sense of exercising a virulent antipathy toward African-Americans but of being, like most of us, affected by feelings about race.
        Here's one way to think about your reaction. When you see ''Gladiator,'' the hero is not portrayed by a citizen of ancient Rome; he does not speak Latin. He is a New Zealander, and nobody complains (except a few carping movie critics who are just jealous of Russell Crowe). When you go to ''The Lion King,'' the title character is not a lion. Movies, theater, ballet -- all are artificial. To experience them is to accept many contrivances. In Shakespeare's day, men played the women's roles, and people did not see this as an ''aesthetic incongruity'' but as a theatrical convention.
        What prevented your doing likewise at ''The Nutcracker'' were your ideas about race. Remember, we're talking about dancing snowflakes here, yet none of the dancers were crystalline specks of frozen water. The entire event eschewed any pretense of corresponding to the real world. What you call an aesthetic response is invariably more complicated than that, a product of many of our ideas.
        Not so long ago, some folks would have reacted similarly to a Jewish singer in a leading role at the opera. But as anti-Semitism waned in America, so did such attitudes. As race-neutral casting becomes commonplace, I think you'll no longer see it as incongruous; you'll judge a dancer by her skill, not her race.
        My mother is an amateur cat breeder who sells undocumented Persians. When the last buyer, a veterinarian, discovered a congenital heart defect in two of the kittens, I asked my mother to get the parents checked or to discontinue breeding. She refused and does not plan to inform future buyers. Would it be wrong to have the cat spayed on my own?
        Daly Clement, Saco, Maine
        Well, I wouldn't try spaying the cat on your own, out in the garage, if that's what you mean. These things require medical training. (I do like the idea of ''undocumented Persians'' slipping across the border on little cat feet.) Your mother is, as you imply, acting disreputably, but I'm wary of solutions to any ethical problem that involve illicit surgery -- to a cat or its owner.
        You have a less radical alternative: take the cats in for a checkup. This might reveal that the breeding pair is unlikely to pass on the condition you fear -- problem solved. If the results of this vigilante medical exam prove disappointing, you still have nonsurgical options. You could encourage the vet to talk to your mother. You could try to contact the buyers. You could even put in a call to animal-control officers, but this won't improve the atmosphere at your next family dinner.
        If none of these measures avail, this may be a transgression that the buyers themselves can respond to effectively -- demanding a refund, for example, or contacting the Department of Consumer Affairs.
        THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 12-17-06: THE ETHICIST
      