
        Austere by the very stinginess of its materials, music for a single stringed instrument can make us a little lonely. Destitute as such pieces often are, Bach's six suites for the cellos arrive, against expectations, as a young man's music, filled with life and tuneful directness. This is Bach less to be immersed in than conversed with.
        Scheduling all six suites in a day, as did Colin Carr at the Good Shepherd-Faith Presbyterian Church on Saturday, offers a tempting completeness while threatening something between a marathon and an obstacle course for both player and listener. Mr. Carr played the Nos. 1, 3 and 5 in the late afternoon, then took a long break in preparation for the even numbers later on.
        It was two days of an awful lot of Bach for strings. On Friday at the same church, Ani Kavafian and Kenneth Cooper played the six violin and keyboard sonatas. It's all part of a mini-Baroque festival with which the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center has surrounded its usual Christmastime performances of the ''Brandenburg'' Concertos. The church -- boxlike in shape, unadorned, around the corner from Alice Tully Hall and seating about 300 -- will be one alternative site when Tully closes for renovation in the near future. Though not much to look at, the space has a live and clear sound.
        The duo-sonatas were written in spite of Bach's daily and daunting responsibilities to church music. The cello suites, on the other hand, are a part of the instrumental repertory that flooded from Bach in his mid-30s during his secular days in a princely court. Mr. Carr is not only an excellent, expressive musician, but he also has the steadfastness -- perhaps, combat toughness -- to play well consistently under the pressures of public performance.
        Ms. Kavafian, perhaps more used to chamber-music playing, jumped at Bach's violin parts with a freewheeling near-impulsiveness that might not have pleased the historically minded but was true to its own heart. Her intonation held fast over a difficult span of music, although untidy bowing sometimes did her in. Mr. Cooper was a first-rate forte-pianist.
        This music sounds old to us, but a lot of it was experimental at the time. Early pianos, of which Mr. Cooper's was a replica, were still far from being accepted, even by Bach himself. The cello was a newly invented instrument and had little or no solo repertory behind it. If the composer comes down to us as the great summarizer of music that came before him, he had his adventures into the avant-garde as well.
        MUSIC REVIEW
      