
        There's water on Mars, so we're going to live on the Moon. Does that strike anybody as weird?
        Last week, NASA announced that it was going to build a base on the Moon. Two days later, in what was sort of a funeral valedictory for the Mars Global Surveyor, which recently passed into silence and is presumed dead in orbit, scientists said that photographs it took over the last seven years showed changes caused by rivulets running down crater walls.
        The Mars rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, had already convinced most Mars experts that there was water on the planet's surface long ago. Last week's announcement was the best evidence so far that it is still there, under the red sand. This was the most tantalizing news yet for the diehards who still hope that there might have once been life on Mars, or that microbial Martians might still be nestled in dark warm recesses, waiting for visitors from another world to read the message written in whatever genomic language has been carved out of chemistry, starlight and time.
        NASA's announcement underscored the unmatched mystique of Mars. It was enough to make you want to go there, or at least send a probe to dig in those gullies, drill the sands, bring back some mud and put it under the microscope to see if anything -- some bacterium that would change history -- is swimming.
        Probably that mystical microbe is not there. We all remember the flap over alleged evidence of life in the famous Mars meteorite back in 1995.
        We science fiction fans rise to the bait again and again like dumb trout to the shiny fly -- only to bounce back to Earth, and to our loneliness.
        That's not to say that NASA is not doing enough to explore Mars. There are three working orbiters and two rovers there now, and another craft will land near the planet's North Pole in a year. But the plan to retrieve a chunk of Martian soil and bring it back to Earth for scrutiny has been delayed until the middle of the next decade, budget permitting. It makes you wonder again: Why, if Mars is so fascinating, does NASA now have a fixation on the Moon? In last week's first announcement, the agency said it would build a permanent international base, probably near one of the Moon's poles, by 2024.
        In one of those twists that must make it fun to be the American starship commander these days, that is to say, the NASA administrator, the dual (one is tempted to say dueling) announcements underscored the disparity between these two visions of space adventure.
        On the one hand there is the Red Planet, home of mythical canals and yearning. Astrobiologists are dying to get their hands, or at least their robots, on it -- oops, astrobiology research was slashed in the last NASA budget.
        Mars has water, apparently, and an atmosphere that greater minds than mine contend could be transformed and thickened enough to breathe, and maybe even past or future life forms. Someday, a few dreamers say, our descendants could walk to a pool of water in the red sand, like the settlers in Ray Bradbury's ''Martian Chronicles,'' look at their reflections and see Martians.
        In the discussions about the space program that flare in this country about once a decade, usually after some shuttle catastrophe, Mars emerges as the favorite goal of human exploration. Both President Bushes invoked it as a goal in reinvigorating the space program. Both times we got something else.
        On the other hand there is the Moon, by all accounts a dead cinder. Recent attempts to find water there, in the form of hypothesized ice sheets at the poles, have come up empty, which would seem to pose a problem for long-term settlement. NASA's imagineers see the ice as a source for both water and rocket fuel.
        It feels as if we've been down this road before. NASA likes to compare the lunar base to bases in Antarctica, where nations have cooperated to save and explore the frozen continent. But the whole thing sounds to me more reminiscent of the early days and promises of the International Space Station.
        There, too, we had international partners for a facility that could grow and sprawl, something that would be a science lab, a spaceport, a training ground for the future. We all know how that came out. Today the space station is a giant turkey in the sky. It is being assembled as fast as possible for an uncertain future.
        These things, shuttles, space stations, Moon colonies, are always advertised as necessary way stations. But they wind up being destinations and sinkholes of money themselves.
        The scientific community seems to have a lukewarm reception to the lunar base idea, fearing that it will suck money from science. NASA declined to put a price tag on the Moon base, saying it would be financed by savings from closing down the shuttle and space station construction. But few scientists or outside experts think the NASA administrator, Michael D. Griffin, has been given enough money to accomplish even those intermediary goals. As a result, NASA had to back away last year from a previous promise not to take ''one thin dime'' from the agency's science budget to pay for human exploration.
        That is not a promising precedent.
        On the other hand, the Moon base could disappear like raindrops in the desert during the four presidential administrations and nine Congresses to come between now and 2024.
        In fact, in some quarters there is a feeling that NASA should get out of human spaceflight altogether and leave the task to entrepreneurs like Richard Branson, who recently expressed a willingness to give Stephen Hawking a ride on his coming Virgin Galactic spaceline.
        NASA's need to avoid all risk drives the price of human space flight cosmically high, said Martin Rees, a cosmologist at Cambridge University and Britain's astronomer royal. He asked in an e-mail message, ''Does the U.S. public really want to spend tens or even hundreds of billions of dollars on transport and support for the cast of a long-running 'Big Brother' or 'Truman Show'?''
        Giving up human adventures, or cutting them back, would leave plenty of money for the inspirational science, like the Hubble Space Telescope, the Mars rovers and the Titan lander, which have carried NASA's water during the last uninspiring shuttle decades.
        You have to give Dr. Griffin, a real rocket scientist, credit for his ability to make tough calls, cut Gordian knots of bureaucracy in the space program and steer his ship decisively. It's just that I worry he is zooming off in the wrong direction.
        ESSAY
      