
        For 10 years, he was Yoko Ono's trusted chauffeur, a former Turkish military man working himself to the bone for the widow of an assassinated rock star.
        His life seemed to consist of taking care of a stable of cars, including Ms. Ono's Bentley, occasionally collecting tickets for minor traffic infractions, like driving without a seat belt, and taking the long way home from Ms. Ono's apartment in the Dakota, overlooking Central Park, to his more modest house in Amityville on the South Shore of Long Island.
        Then, the police said, last Friday, the anniversary of John Lennon's death, he apparently snapped, turning on his boss the way the coachman might go after the queen in a Grimm's fairy tale.
        In a conversation with Ms. Ono at her apartment, the chauffeur, Koral Karsan, threatened to release private information about Ms. Ono and her family unless she paid him $2 million, according to prosecutors. Four days later, on Tuesday, Mr. Karsan visited Ms. Ono's lawyer, Jonas Herbsman, in his Manhattan office, where he threatened to kill Ms. Ono, her son, Sean Lennon, and himself, law enforcement officials involved in the investigation said yesterday.
        At Mr. Karsan's arraignment yesterday in Manhattan Criminal Court, a prosecutor said that Mr. Karsan boasted that he had people ''on standby'' ready to kill Ms. Ono and that he was planning to move to Turkey and peddle a book about her private life over the Internet if she did not yield to his demand for $2 million.
        The prosecutor, Maureen O'Connor, read in court a passage of the letter she said Mr. Karsan had used to try to blackmail Ms. Ono.
        ''I will not only write about these recordings, but will distribute them to European broadcasting stations,'' Ms. O'Connor quoted from the letter. ''Be advised I am moving back to Turkey permanently and will publish my book in Turkey and will distribute the prints throughout the Internet from Iran where I have already secured e-commerce capability.''
        As Mr. Karsan, who is charged with attempted grand larceny through extortion, was being arrested on Wednesday, he blurted out to reporters that Ms. Ono had sexually harassed him. But investigators said they had no knowledge that Mr. Karsan had made such claims in the meeting with Ms. Ono or her lawyer.
        His lawyer, Patrick K. Brosnahan Jr., hinted that Mr. Karsan, who is 50 and lives with his wife and 26-year-old son, was concerned that he was close to retirement age and needed to be compensated with some kind of severance package. Prosecutors said Ms. Ono paid him a salary of $150,000 to $200,000 as her driver.
        Mr. Karsan began driving Ms. Ono while he was working for a limousine service that she used in Manhattan more than 10 years ago. Ms. Ono ''reached out'' to him and hired him as her personal driver, believing that he could give her, as a single woman and a celebrity, the kind of security she needed, Mr. Brosnahan said. He said he believed that Mr. Karsan had been in the Turkish Air Force.
        Their relationship, Mr. Brosnahan said, was deeper than that of an employer and an employee. ''He would have laid down his life on her behalf,'' he said.
        Mr. Karsan gave Ms. Ono a letter saying that he ''was looking for her to compensate him for his years of service and that he worked hard and his life was nearly ruined by the hard work he put in on this job,'' according to one of the officials, who was given anonymity because the investigation was continuing.
        ''He felt that she owed him,'' the letter said, according to this official. And if Ms. Ono ''did not take care of him,'' he would expose her most private life. Among the salacious details he claimed to have were recordings of Ms. Ono's political views and a photograph of her in her pajamas.
        Mr. Karsan also claimed that he had been poisoning Ms. Ono, the official said, although the police did not find any evidence that that was true.
        A neighbor in Amityville, Deborah Waring, said Mr. Karsan made small talk with neighbors and gave them Christmas chocolates every year. Ms. Waring said she once helped him push Ms. Ono's Bentley out of his snowy driveway.
        Investigators said Mr. Karsan claimed he had rigged a car to record Ms. Ono's conversations, including her views on matters of government, but the police examined his cars and found no evidence of recording devices.
        Mr. Brosnahan said it strained credulity that Mr. Karsan would make an extortion attempt directly to Ms. Ono's lawyer.
        ''This is not how extortionists go about extorting money,'' Mr. Brosnahan said. ''They don't make demands in lawyers' offices.''
        The Manhattan district attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, speaking at a press conference in his office yesterday, said that Mr. Karsan was ''very sophisticated.''
        Mr. Karsan, thin and tall, at 6-foot-1, wearing a long black woolen overcoat, his white hair swept back, said nothing and no plea was entered during his arraignment yesterday. Judge Tanya Kennedy ordered him jailed until he could post bail of $250,000 cash or $500,000 bond and provide assurance that the money did not come from illegal activity.
        Judge Kennedy also issued orders of protection against Mr. Karsan for Ms. Ono and her lawyer, Mr. Herbsman.
      