
        The steep decline of the dollar is punishing Asia's smaller economies and should be addressed by global financial regulators, the governor of the Thai central bank, Tarisa Watanagase, said Wednesday.
        As the Thai stock market rebounded from a record one-day drop of 15 percent, closing up 11 percent Wednesday, Ms. Tarisa defended the government's abortive attempt to block short-term foreign investment, portraying Thailand as a victim of the huge imbalances in trade and savings that send trillions of dollars sloshing in and out of developing economies.
        ''This is not a problem unique to Thailand,'' Ms. Tarisa said in an interview. ''I'm sure that if this sort of problem is not cured in a cooperative manner, we could see similar measures elsewhere.''
        By imposing capital controls on Monday, Thailand sought to slow the inflows of foreign money that have resulted in a double-digit appreciation of its currency against the dollar since the start of the year. The controls were reversed Tuesday after the market plunged.
        Analysts criticized what they called a lack of coordination among finance officials here. Thirachai Phuvanatnaranubala, the secretary general of Thailand's Securities and Exchange Commission, for example, said he had not been told in advance about the decision to impose capital controls.
        Ms. Tarisa said the biggest failing was a lack of communication with investors when the new rules were announced Monday. ''There was not enough communication in English in terms of the details of the regulation,'' she said.
        The bank had been battling to contain a surge of short-term investments into the baht, she said, particularly in the country's market for corporate bonds and commercial paper.
        On Dec. 4, the bank issued restrictions on foreign investment in the bond market, but the measures failed to have any impact. The bank then decided to issue blanket restrictions on all foreign investment, Ms. Tarisa said.
        It gave investors only one day of warning, to prevent them from selling in anticipation of the new rules. But the market's response was more than the bank had anticipated, she said.
        The rules required investors to set aside 30 percent of any new investment in an interest-free reserve account for one year, calculating the opportunity cost of doing so at about 1.5 percent.
        With investors in Thailand earning roughly 20 percent a year, Ms. Tarisa said, ''we did not see that as a major factor to scare the long-term investors.''
        It remains to be seen whether Thailand's attempt to stem the tide of foreign money will succeed. ''It does mean the risk of investing in Thailand has increased,'' said Supavud Saicheua, an economist at Phatra Securities in Bangkok. ''People won't forget. When you lose 15 percent in the market in one day, it's very difficult to forget.''
        With the United States current-account deficit for the third quarter at a record $225.6 billion and growth slowing, money is pushing into Asia to capitalize on the region's buoyant economy, particularly in China and India. The surge of funds pushes the value of currencies higher and makes Asian exports more expensive on global markets.
        James McCormack, senior director at Fitch Ratings in Hong Kong, said this was a regional problem. ''Every Asian economy is dealing with currency strength in one way or another, and it's something they don't want,'' he said. ''They're still export-led economies.''
        Worsening the problem is China's pegging of its currency, the yuan, to the dollar, economists say. The yuan does not rise even as China's trade surplus grows and investment pours into the country, so smaller exporters like Thailand must try to prevent their own currency from rising too quickly or risk losing exports to China.
        Domestically, the policy reversal this week has taken its toll on the image of Thailand's military-appointed government, barely two months in office. When it was presented in October, the cabinet was described as a dream team of technocrats untainted by politics and typified by Pridiyathorn Devakula, the finance minister, an American-trained economist who had served as the head of the central bank.
        That image unraveled this week with the market turbulence.
        ''It's very unfortunate,'' said Korn Chatikavanij, a former investment banker who is deputy secretary general of the Democrat Party. ''It's a reflection of the drawback of having a technocratic government, one that doesn't quite grasp the world's realities and the realities of how markets function.''
        The government must now reckon with the wrath of stock market investors who displayed their anger on newspaper Web sites and in chat rooms. ''Pridiyathorn has created a whole lot more enemies from this episode,'' The Nation, a Bangkok daily, said in an editorial Wednesday. ''His enemies are now picking up their knives.''
      