
        Tiki Barber's body ached so badly after the Giants' overtime victory against the Philadelphia Eagles on Sept. 17 that it cemented his decision to retire from football.
        That afternoon, linebacker Jeremiah Trotter, the Eagles' run-stopping specialist, battered Barber, who was held to 51 yards on 21 carries.
        Trotter's success against Barber was not new. He has spent his nine-year career in the same division as the Giants, playing for the Redskins and the Eagles . Barber said Thursday that Trotter has always been his toughest nemesis.
        The difference, said Barber, was that after their last meeting, he felt sorer than he had after any game in his 10 years in the N.F.L.
        ''He has always hit me hard,'' Barber said. ''I definitely have battle scars from him, but he has some from me, too.''
        A month after that game, Barber, 31, said he planned to retire at end of the season to pursue a TV career.
        He will face Trotter one last time, on Sunday, when the Giants play the Eagles at the Meadowlands. The teams are 7-6 and tied for second place in the National Football Conference East.
        ''It's a great situation to be in, I think, for both of our teams,'' Barber said. ''We're playing a meaningful game in December against a division rival with a lot at stake. It's fun. It's what you would ask for. Obviously, we'd love our situation to be better, to be different, but that's the way it is and we're excited about it.''
        With the Eagles' defense struggling, the Giants are expected to try to run the ball, meaning more work for Barber. The Eagles allowed an average of 104 rushing yards through the first seven games, but they have allowed 186.5 yards a game on the ground in the last seven. They are ranked 29th in run defense.
        ''We can't expect them to play the run defense they've had the last few weeks,'' Barber said. ''We have to expect their best effort. That's going to require our best effort as well.''
        Jevon Kearse, the Eagles' standout defensive end, injured his knee against the Giants in September and was lost for the season. That injury took its toll on a defense whose linebackers and secondary are aging.
        But Trotter has had an outstanding season and is ranked 15th in the league with 103 tackles.
        ''He'll see something, he'll guess at it, and he'll come straight downhill at you,'' said Barber, who called Trotter the most consistently hard hitter in the league. ''The first time we played them, in September, he was dead-on every time.''
        For Barber, who may be playing one of his last games at Giants Stadium, that could mean plenty of bruises Sunday. Barber expects to be sent straight up the middle against the Eagles. ''And that involves banging heads with Jeremiah Trotter,'' he said.
        EXTRA POINTS
        For the second day in a row, defensive end Michael Strahan did individual drills during practice, but he remains doubtful for Sunday's game. Although the Giants initially said Strahan would miss four weeks because of a sprained foot, he has missed five. Coach Tom Coughlin said he was ''encouraged'' by Strahan's progress.  Among the places that the NFL Network is not available is the hotel in New Jersey where the Giants stay before home games. That means they will not see Saturday night's game between the Dallas Cowboys (8-5) and the Atlanta Falcons (7-6), which has huge playoff implications for the Giants.  Receiver Plaxico Burress, who caught the winning touchdown against the Eagles in the last meeting between the teams, may have created bulletin board material for the Eagles yesterday, saying the Philadelphia defense would not be able to take him out of the game. ''I don't see that happening,'' he said. ''They would be crazy to think they could do it. I am just going to go out and do what I have been doing, just go out and make some plays.''
        PRO FOOTBALL
      