
        IN a year characterized by the undoing, redoing or modifying of regulations, hedge funds for a time looked as if they would end 2006 as the only major businesses more regulated than they had been before.
        Until now.
        On Wednesday, the Securities and Exchange Commission, under its chairman, Christopher Cox, embraced its investor protection mandate and redefined who is rich, severely limiting the number of people who can invest in hedge funds.
        The impact of the rule, if passed, will be negligible for big funds that attract the majority of money and disastrous for small funds who depend on rich people, and even the moderately rich, to get a start. The rule will be significant for the S.E.C. because it finally gives it ammunition to fight Congressional demands to know what the agency is doing about all that money in hedge funds.
        The commission started 2006 with a registration rule that forced most hedge funds to disclose the names and any criminal records of those running the funds and permitted the S.E.C. to do routine audits.
        A federal appeals court tossed out registration, animating the hedge fund industry until Amaranth Advisors, a $9 billion fund, staged a disappearing act.
        Soon afterward, the Connecticut attorney general and some high-ranking members of Congress took notice and serious regulation looked possible. That impulse appears to have been squelched by the November elections, which put Democrats in power, and by the rule.
        Before the new rule, hedge funds could raise money from 100 so-called accredited investors, those with a net worth of $1 million (including the value of the investor's home) or two consecutive years of income of $200,000 (or $300,000 for a couple's combined income). They could also raise money from an unlimited number of qualified buyers, those with investable assets of $5 million.
        Critics noted that the housing boom had made a lot of not-so-rich people accredited investors. So the S.E.C. proposed raising the standard to require investable assets of $2.5 million -- assets in stocks or bonds or real estate, as long as the real estate served only investment purposes.
        The objective, staff members said, was to make sure that people investing in hedge funds had experience in the markets. In 1982, when the $1 million accredited investment standards were set, 1.87 percent of American households qualified. By 2006, 8.47 percent of American households could invest in hedge funds. With the new rule, only 1.3 percent of American households can join the party.
        Lawyers representing small hedge funds, as well as hedge funds that started small, at $5 million to $10 million, and got large ($500 million to $1 billion) challenged the rule, protesting that the brunt of the impact would be borne by small funds.
        ''There is no viable argument that would support the notion that an investor with $2.5 million in investable assets is better suited to determine the quality of a hedge fund investment than an investor with a net worth of $1 million,'' said Ron Geffner, a lawyer at Sadis & Goldberg who represents 400 hedge funds and funds of funds.
        So why did the agency change the rule?
        ''The S.E.C. and politicians have been on a witch hunt for hedge fund managers for making too much money, for violating the law and not adding value to the economy when in reality, that is the exception and not the rule,'' Mr. Geffner said.
        The rule has flaws. For one, venture capital funds are exempted because they provide capital to start-up companies, raising the question of how a start-up company differs from a start-up investment manager.
        ''It's demoralizing to employees to tell them they cannot invest with the people they work with and know best,'' said Paul Roth of the Schulte Roth & Zabel law firm.
        Most hedge funds have a minimum investment requirement of $1 million, making the accredited investor definition seem redundant. (If you only have $1 million in the form of your house, you won't have the additional $1 million to get into the fund.)
        The rule coincides with waning enthusiasm for regulating hedge funds.
        ''I'm not envisioning, legislatively, running back to that,'' Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, said about hedge fund regulation during a news conference. Mr. Dodd has been preparing to take over the leadership of the Senate Banking Committee. ''Again, I'd rather listen to people who are out there talking about what needs to be done,'' he said.
        His Democratic counterpart in the House, Barney Frank of Massachusetts, who proposed legislation this year to authorize the S.E.C. to reinstate the registration rule after the courts dismissed it, seems to have changed his tune.
        ''Not legislating, no,'' he was quoted by the San Francisco Chronicle. ''What we need to do is have hearings on hedge funds.''
        During which the S.E.C. will say, ''only for the very, very rich.''
        INSIDER
      