
        What's good for the goose is supposed to be good for the gander, but in this case, who is the goose and who is the gander?
        This case is about baseball and slot machines, about Steve Swindal and Bob Nutting. Swindal is one of two managing general partners of the Yankees. Nutting is chairman of the board of the Pittsburgh Pirates. Both have other business interests, and that's where the slot machines come in.
        Nutting, a West Virginia resident and the chief executive of the Ogden newspaper chain, bought the Seven Springs Mountain Resort in western Pennsylvania earlier this year. His original idea was to build a casino of 500 slot machines at the ski resort, enhancing the resort and its revenue.
        But he has abandoned his plan because baseball doesn't permit a club owner to own or operate a casino.
        ''We withdrew the application for slot machines because the rules in baseball are very clear,'' Nutting said yesterday by telephone. ''Rather than try to come up with a structure that maybe would have subverted the intent, we thought it was appropriate to respect the intent of the rule and withdrew.''
        Swindal is a partner in Excelsior Racing Associates, which last month won the recommendation of a committee to take over New York state's thoroughbred racing franchise. The franchise covers the Aqueduct, Belmont and Saratoga tracks. The New York Racing Association has owned the franchise for 50 years, but its license expires at the end of next year. The State Legislature will designate the next franchise holder from among Excelsior, NYRA and Empire Racing.
        Baseball owners have long owned racehorses, at least since John Galbreath in the 1940s. No owner is believed to have owned a racetrack. Certainly no owner has owned a track with slot machines on the premises. But that's what Excelsior plans to do. Swindal said Aqueduct had 4,500 slot machines ready to become operative.
        Swindal, who is George Steinbrenner's son-in-law, said he had spoken to Commissioner Bud Selig about his participation in Excelsior.
        ''I have kept the commissioner informed about Excelsior and the bid process; I got his permission before I went into it,'' Swindal said in a telephone interview Friday. ''I haven't encountered any problems. Before I went into it, I wanted to make sure. I said: 'I want to bid on this franchise. It involves parimutuel racing.' He said, 'O.K. but keep me informed.' ''
        Swindal said he told Selig about the slot machines, too.
        ''He was informed of that,'' Swindal said. ''I did let him know that Aqueduct had 4,500 machines that were part of the bid. Most parimutuel facilities have slots now. It's not an uncommon thing. They're trying to get people back to the track.''
        In addition, Swindal said, he told Selig that one of his Excelsior partners was Richard Fields, a casino developer.
        Steinbrenner is not involved in Excelsior, Swindal said.
        Selig, saying he didn't want to comment on the matter, did not confirm Swindal's characterization of what was said or blessed.
        ''When we have all the details,'' Selig said yesterday by telephone, ''we'll be able to make a judgment on whether it violates our rules or is in the spirit of what I think clubs should be involved in.''
        Baseball has long had a concern about casinos, although when Bowie Kuhn was the commissioner (from 1969 to 1984), he seemed to be more strict about the issue than his successors. Las Vegas has had a minor league team for 25 years, and the city has tried to recruit teams to hold spring training there. Most interestingly, Major League Baseball has scheduled its 2008 winter meetings for Las Vegas.
        ''Baseball has always been held to higher standards, like with steroids,'' Nutting said. ''The gaming thing is an awkward and difficult situation with baseball.''
        Nutting said he had a number of discussions with Tom Ostertag, baseball's general counsel, ''as we tried to put together a structure that would keep us separate from any interest in slot machines, but we were unable to put together the kind of structure that would have satisfied the gaming commission.''
        Baseball has approved a structure for the owners of the Detroit Tigers where casinos are concerned. The Ilitch family has vast holdings in Detroit, including a casino, but Michael Ilitch is listed as the owner of the Tigers and his wife, Marian, is not listed as an owner.
        Marian Ilitch, though, was listed as an owner in the team's media guide the first five years of the family's ownership. Her name disappeared from the guide when the Ilitch casino was on the horizon. Marian Ilitch operates the MotorCity Casino in Detroit, and her husband is not listed as a casino owner.
        The arrangement has raised some eyebrows among some baseball people, but Selig has sanctioned it.
        Nutting couldn't separate ownership of the resort and the slot-machine casino to satisfy baseball because Pennsylvania Gaming Commission rules don't permit separate ownership.
        The only way Nutting could have owned the casino was to sell his ownership share in the Pirates, which he doesn't want to do. The Nutting family is the biggest shareholder of the Pirates.
        Nutting and Swindal would not comment on the other's venture, each saying he didn't know enough about it.
        Asked if he would be surprised if Selig sanctioned Swindal's venture, Nutting said: ''I don't have any knowledge of how those deals would be structured. I don't know enough to comment.''
        ''The regulations are pretty clear,'' he added. ''Gaming interest is very broadly defined.''
        Swindal, on the other hand, said, ''I would be surprised'' if Selig didn't let him go forward with the Excelsior enterprise.
        What would be surprising is if Selig said yes to Swindal after Nutting assumed the commissioner would say no to him.
        ON BASEBALL
      