
        When Philadelphia Eagles defensive end Trent Cole grabbed Eli Manning's errant pass out of the air late in the fourth quarter, he heard nothing. Giants Stadium went almost completely quiet for Cole as Giants fans swallowed their screams of misery.
        In the second game of the season, Cole had incurred a critical penalty -- an unsportsmanlike conduct call -- that facilitated the Giants' stunning comeback victory over the Eagles.
        But like the Eagles themselves, Cole found redemption Sunday, picking off Manning's pass and returning it, complete with high steps, 19 yards for a touchdown that put the finishing touch on the Eagles' 36-22 victory.
        It was the first touchdown of Cole's career, but it also served as a fitting metaphor for the Eagles' turnaround. Less than a month ago, they were blown out by the Indianapolis Colts, 45-21. Donovan McNabb had been lost for the season with a knee injury and the Eagles had lost five of six games.
        But after their victory over the Giants on Sunday, the Eagles now control their destiny. If they beat Dallas on Christmas, they will be in position to win the National Football Conference East with a season-ending victory over Atlanta. At worst, they seem close to a sure bet to hold on to one of the N.F.C.'s two wild-card spots, with the Giants clinging to the last wild card.
        ''I think we should have been at this point,'' Cole said. ''We should be further than that. We should be on top in the division.''
        Given the state of the N.F.C. in general, Cole might be right. The Eagles have won three in a row to surge back into the playoff picture, aided by a few lucky breaks and an offense that has been steady if unspectacular without McNabb.
        On Sunday, the Eagles seemed to find gaping holes in the Giants' defense. The Eagles took the lead early in the fourth quarter when Brian Westbrook, who has emerged as an outspoken team leader in McNabb's absence, shot up the middle and through the strength of the Giants' defense, rocketing 28 yards untouched for a touchdown.
        And little more than 10 seconds before Cole's interception, Jeff Garcia, who has resurrected his career in McNabb's absence, hit wide receiver Reggie Brown on the right sideline for a 19-yard touchdown. That play came only minutes after Garcia was intercepted by Will Demps, which set up the touchdown that briefly gave the Giants a fourth-quarter lead. It was not artful football, but for the Eagles, at least, it was effective.
        ''It was two 7-6 teams,'' Eagles Coach Andy Reid. ''It was back and forth. That is what you are going to get. Two teams that have had up-and-down seasons and it was an up-and-down game.''
        There may not be a team that has had more ups and downs in the last year than the Eagles. Coming off a Super Bowl appearance, they combusted last season, as Terrell Owens's friendship-turned-feud with McNabb played out on a national stage and took the team chemistry with it. Owens was sent packing to Dallas, and the Eagles chose to acquire Garcia -- another former nemesis of Owens's -- because some of his best years in San Francisco were with Marty Mornhinweg, who is now the Eagles' offensive coordinator.
        Garcia's fiery personality has injected energy into what had been forecast as a moribund end to the Eagles' season. After Garcia scrambled around right end for a first down in the fourth quarter, he spiked the football and was penalized 15 yards for taunting. Two plays later he threw the interception.
        ''He is a competitive little son of a gun,'' Reid said. ''He had the slamming the ball in the guy's face. I'm glad he has that amount of energy at 36.''
        Most of all, what Garcia has is a team behind him. Westbrook went over 1,000 yards for the season Sunday, with 97 yards on 19 rushes. And Garcia has been close to flawless. The fourth-quarter interception was the first he had thrown in his last 164 pass attempts, the sort of game management that the Eagles need.
        With the rest of the N.F.C. flailing, too -- losses by Atlanta, Carolina and Minnesota helped the Eagles' playoff chances -- the Eagles might be staggered, but at least they are standing. On one of the stadium's big screens Sunday afternoon, the Giants played a clip of Mr. T pummeling Rocky Balboa in one of the ''Rocky'' movies. It was a counterpoint to the Eagles, who frequently play clips of ''Rocky'' movies to pump up their fans in Philadelphia. In the clip played Sunday, Rocky was a bloody mess. Of course, as one Eagles player noted later, Rocky ends up winning at the end.
        Perhaps that, too, will turn out to be a metaphor for the Eagles.
        ''Last year, we were a team divided,'' Westbrook said. ''We weren't together at all. This year, when Donovan went down, we rallied. This team is real resilient.''
        PRO FOOTBALL
      