
        Mikki Moore, a reserve forward for the Nets, may be the only N.B.A. player who can talk about snakes using the words ''only'' and ''bite'' in the same sentence.
        Growing up in Gaffney, S.C., Moore, a self-professed country boy, used to find snakes in his grandmother's backyard. When he returned home for the summer while at the University of Nebraska, his chores included baling hay. That often put Moore in close contact with snakes, but they did not faze him.
        ''I knew the only thing they could do was bite you,'' he said.
        It may be only natural that one of Moore's hobbies is collecting snakes.
        The 7-foot, 225-pound Moore owns five snakes: two albino Burmese pythons (one nine feet long, the other four), a nine-foot Colombian red tail boa constrictor and two six-foot corn snakes. About once a week, he feeds them rats, which he buys at pet stores.
        Each of his snakes has an aquarium at his home. He handles them but does not let them loose because he doesn't want them to bother his girlfriend, who lives with him, or his 9- and 6-year-old daughters, who are often with him during the off-season.
        Moore, 31, who has played on seven N.B.A. teams and lives in Gaffney in the off-season, has not allowed his nomadic life to stop him from being with his snakes.
        He ships them between homes via Alaska Airlines, which transports them in sacks that resemble pillow cases. (Yes, Moore has seen the movie ''Snakes on a Plane'' and he assures you that such a debacle could not happen in real life.)
        Moore's passion for snake collecting is better known than the hobby he calls his true love: collecting and restoring vintage cars. He owns five: 1964 and '65 Chevrolet Impalas, a '70 Oldsmobile Delta 88 and two convertibles, a '67 Lincoln Continental and a '63 Ford Galaxy.
        Moore said he believed that having snakes in his home was no more dangerous than sky diving or bungee jumping. Still, there are limitations to Moore's love of reptiles.
        Although his right arm and shoulder bear a tattoo of a venomous king cobra, that is as close as he will come to owning one.
        As Moore said, ''I don't do poisonous.''
        OFF THE GLASS
      