
        LONG before Hugh Laurie was captivating and galling American television viewers as the prickly Dr. Gregory House on Fox's ''House,'' he was half of the acclaimed British sketch comedy team Fry and Laurie, along with his fellow Cambridge graduate Stephen Fry. (That's right: Dr. House's American accent is fake.) Their collaboration began more than 25 years ago, when both were members of the Cambridge Footlights troupe. They went on to team up on numerous TV shows in Britain, but for American audiences they were perhaps best known as Jeeves and Bertie Wooster on the ''Jeeves and Wooster'' series on ''Masterpiece Theater.''
        Eventually they went their separate ways: Mr. Laurie to Fox, Mr. Fry to act, write novels and memoirs, direct movies (''Bright Young Things'') and pursue whatever else a Renaissance man does these days.
        Thankfully, there are recently released DVDs of the first two seasons of ''A Bit of Fry and Laurie,'' the duo's inspired sketch comedy series, originally broadcast in 1989 and 1990 on BBC2.
        Mr. Fry and Mr. Laurie wield words -- real or nonsensical -- with a precision Henry Higgins would admire. Skewering language, they also conjure a Lewis Carroll-like world. While there are moments of physical comedy, the pratfalls that produce the most laughs are verbal. Sample this prime example of Fry-Laurie gibberish: ''Hold the newsreader's nose squarely, waiter, or friendly milk will countermand my trousers.''
        Their adventures through the looking glass take them to strange places. After a fanciful skit about a privatized police force (a dig at Thatcher-era policies), Mr. Fry and Mr. Laurie play critics on a show called ''Argue the Toss,'' commenting on the police sketch ('' Brilliant!''). Next comes ''Up the Arts,'' in which the two, playing another pair of critics, analyze the insights of the previous critics. (''So their futures as critics -- bulbous, would you say?'') Two more critics riffing on the previous critics come next on ''Oh No, Not Another One.''
        The Mad Hatter would grow delirious at this party.
        At times, an American viewer might feel a different sort of delirium -- or a need for a first from Cambridge in Anglophilia. Mr. Fry, as a particularly unctuous clerk at a jewelry store, extols the beauty of the day to a bewildered Mr. Laurie, stating that the morning is ''as fine and crisp and gutty as any since the days that Compton and Edrich opened for England and the sun never went down on the British without asking permission first.'' Maybe you don't need to know that Denis Compton (1918-97) and Bill Edrich (1916-86) were famous cricketers, but it sure helps.
        Lamenting TV censors, the two explain that in their next sketch -- set in a courtroom -- they must use made-up words to describe a crime. Portraying a police officer, Mr. Laurie declares that the defendant called him a ''fusking cloff-prunker.'' When the judge expresses ignorance of the term, a lawyer (Mr. Fry) defines it as ''an illicit practice whereby one person frangulates another's plimp, my lord. He or she gratifies the other party by smuctating them avially.'' Eventually, the bailiff faints.
        A bonus on the DVD of the second season is the ''Footlights Revue,'' first broadcast on BBC in 1982. The performers -- including Emma Thompson -- are so young that you can imagine them still clutching their diplomas. In one sketch, Mr. Fry, at his mellifluous best, reads from a letter relating his encounter with Count Dracula in Transylvania. Mr. Fry recalls that when the ''mighty oaken door'' of the castle opened, he beheld the ghastly sight of Dracula's manservant: ''Of all the hideously disfigured spectacles I have ever beheld, those perched on the end of the man's nose remain forever pasted into the album of my memory.'' It's enough to make the count whirl in his coffin. The rest of us can just have a good laugh.
        VINCENT COSGROVE
        DVD
      