
        Bernard Kleiman, general counsel to the United Steelworkers of America for 32 years and a top adviser to five of the union's presidents during decades of industry turmoil, died on Wednesday in Pittsburgh. He was 78.
        Union officials said Mr. Kleiman died of a heart attack, days after he returned from visiting several cities where Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company workers are on strike.
        As general counsel to the steelworkers, Mr. Kleiman negotiated an innovative and controversial agreement in 1973 that barred strikes in the steel industry for a decade. That deal was designed to curb steel imports, because six months before every contract deadline, the nation's automakers and other steel users began greatly increasing their purchases from abroad.
        Mr. Kleiman also negotiated contracts that helped keep several teetering steel companies afloat during the 1980s, when the industry was traumatized by recession and surging imports.
        ''He was probably the most important person in the steelworkers' union for a period of 30 years,'' said Michael Gottesman, a law professor at Georgetown University and a former outside counsel to the union.
        Mr. Gottesman said Mr. Kleiman was ''certainly the most important adviser, the source of much of the major policy decisions that were made.''
        Mr. Kleiman had a major hand in negotiating an affirmative action agreement for the steel and aluminum industries, paving the way to hire more minority workers. The aluminum agreement was upheld in a landmark Supreme Court case, United Steelworkers v. Weber.
        Bernard Kleiman was born in Chicago on Jan. 26, 1928, the son of Isadore and Pearl Kleiman. He grew up in Kendallville, Ind., where his father was a scrap dealer. He played center on the varsity basketball team in high school, and graduated in 1944.
        He interrupted his studies at Purdue University to enlist in the Army. He toured with the Army basketball team and served in Korea; his military service was cut short by scarlet fever. He returned to Purdue and graduated in 1951, having majored in metallurgical engineering. He then attended the Northwestern University School of Law, and graduated in 1954.
        In 1960, he became counsel for District 31 of the union, covering Illinois and Indiana. He spearheaded a successful lawsuit that forced Illinois to reapportion its legislature to assure it followed the principle of one person one vote.
        Impressed by Mr. Kleiman's accomplishments, I. W. Abel, the union's president, named him the union's general counsel in 1965. As general counsel Mr. Kleiman often served as the union's chief negotiator, helping make the nation's steelworkers some of the highest-paid blue-collar workers in the world.
        He negotiated with many leading companies, including United States Steel, Kaiser Aluminum, Bethlehem Steel, Goodyear and Bridgestone Firestone.
        ''It is difficult to overstate his impact on the union,'' said Leo W. Gerard, president of the steelworkers. ''His role with the union was much broader then the typical duties of general counsel.''
        In the 1980s, Mr. Kleiman negotiated deals with two companies that were close to bankruptcy, the Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corporation and the Allegheny Ludlum Corporation, allowing them to pay smaller compensation packages than steelmakers in better financial shape. When the industry rebounded in the late 1980s, Mr. Kleiman spearheaded efforts to restore a pattern in which all steelmakers provided similar wages and benefits.
        Mr. Kleiman stepped down from the general counsel's position in 1997, but remained special counsel to the union's president. He officially retired last summer but continued working, most recently in the union's two-month-old strike against Goodyear.
        He is survived by his wife, Gloria Baime Kleiman; his brother, David Kleiman of Indianapolis; his sister, Carolyn Winn of Locust Valley, N.Y.; his daughter, Leslie Kleiman of Cobble Hill, British Columbia; his son, David Kleiman of Chicago; his stepchildren, Dr. Michael Baime of Philadelphia; David Baime of Washington; Ronald Baime of Pittsburgh; Lynn Mamet of Sherman Oaks, Calif.; and David Mamet, the playwright; three grandchildren; and 12 step-grandchildren.
      