
        APRIL may be the cruelest month, but for those who live and die, professionally speaking, by the Oscar race, December is not far behind.
        Just as they were learning to cope with a shortened awards season -- two years ago, the annual broadcast was moved up by a month to put a squeeze on competing awards ceremonies -- Oscar campaigners were subjected this year to another hardship. The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences declared that awards ballots would go out on Dec. 26, the earliest date yet, with a return deadline of Jan. 13. (The 79th awards ceremony will take place Feb. 25 at the Kodak Theater in Hollywood, and will be broadcast on ABC.)
        Those tweaks have turned what once was the film industry's holiday hiatus into a kind of cinematic hell week for the academy's approximately 5,800 ballot-casting members and the operatives who want their votes.
        On vacation out of town or lolling on the beach, academy members will find it difficult to avoid seeing a movie. Or two. Or three.
        ''We screen in Hawaii, we screen in Aspen, we screen in Malibu,'' said Murray Weissman, a veteran Oscar publicist whose clients in the past included ''Chicago'' and ''Shakespeare in Love'' and this year include ''Bobby'' and ''Flags of Our Fathers.'' ''If we find they're going to a new vacation spot, we'll probably follow them there.''
        DVD ''screeners,'' the subject of controversy several years ago when major studios sought to ban them in an antipiracy drive, are now common enough to have become something of an overload. ''You'd be amazed how many smaller movies don't even get the cellophane cracked by academy members, because they're into looking at the higher-profile films first,'' Mr. Weissman said. ''They just don't have time.''
        As the Oscar calendar is currently constructed, nerves build in early September with the Toronto International Film Festival. The launch pad for dozens of pictures, Toronto can help make a contender, as it may have done this year with ''Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan,'' for which writing or acting awards are not entirely out of range. Or it can break one, as happened with the ill-received drama ''All the King's Men.''
        High anxiety ensues through October and November as aspiring movies roll into the marketplace, sometimes more than a dozen in a single week. By mid-December, early harbingers like the National Board of Review awards and the Independent Spirit and Golden Globe nominations are on the table. But the panic will become acute only on the day after Christmas, thanks in part to industry lore that says half of the nominating votes are cast within a week of the annual academy mailing.
        The academy is tight-lipped about voting statistics. And some close observers believe that Oscar voters have begun to stretch the decision-making process as they scramble to see films that suddenly become available at year's end. How many are now voting in the first week?
        ''My best guess would probably be 25 to 30 percent at most,'' said Tom Ortenberg, president of theatrical releasing for Lionsgate, whose ''Crash'' won best picture this year. ''I've spoken to an awful lot of members who have been waiting till very late in the process to give themselves every chance to catch up with as many pictures as possible.''
        Academy officials, for their part, claim indifference to the frenzy that they have unleashed by compressing the Oscar season. Scheduling is based on ''whether we can get what we need to get done in time to get the ballots mailed and to give people enough time to vote, on the assumption that they have already seen the films,'' said John Pavlik, the academy's director of communications. ''They should have been seeing the films throughout the year, not waiting until the week after Christmas to start watching movies.''
        But even the professionals can find the sudden press of prize-hungry pictures a bit much. ''It's pretty tough to see three films in a day,'' said Tony Angellotti, an Oscar publicist whose many campaigns have included those for ''A Beautiful Mind,'' ''Munich'' and ''Seabiscuit.'' ''I occasionally go to the academy screenings. On a Saturday I will sometimes see a film in the morning, then go to a three o'clock screening and an eight o'clock screening, and your head sort of swims.''
        Rough stuff, but someone's got to do it. ''There's probably a greater volume in December than there used to be,'' said Bill Mechanic, chief executive of Pandemonium Films and a former member of the academy's board of governors. ''But if you're a caring member of the academy, you do your work.''
        Some say this is the only way to ensure that important films aren't forgotten by the time December rolls around. But for Mr. Ortenberg, the problem may have a very simple solution.
        ''Spread out the release of the award-contending pictures,'' he said, ''and there won't be such a smashup at the end of the year.''
        FILM
      