
        Doctors are obligated to guide their patients in making medical decisions.
        But what happens when they believe a patient is about to make a bad personal decision?
        Earlier this year, a patient of mine in her early 20s who was expecting her third child asked to have her tubes tied. A mother of two, with a full-time job and part-time school classes, she saw a fourth child as an impossible burden.
        Tubal ligation is a quick, safe and effective surgery. It fails to prevent pregnancy only about 1 percent to 2 percent of the time. A small incision is made below the belly button the day after a vaginal delivery. The fallopian tube on both sides is fished out, and a knuckle of tube is tied off and cut out. The rest of the tube slips back into the abdomen. Altogether the procedure might take 20 minutes, and the patient goes home without a prolonged stay in the hospital.
        I acknowledged to my patient that the surgery was effective in preventing pregnancy. In terms of making her life better and her happier, though, the prognosis was poorer.
        The best study done on surgical sterilization followed more than 10,000 women who had the procedure. Women under 30 felt regret much more often than those over 30, the researchers found. Other studies suggested that my patient, younger than 25, might be at even higher risk for regret.
        My patient could change her mind and have children after sterilization. A subsequent surgery could reconnect her tubes. She could undergo in vitro fertilization, removing the eggs directly from her ovaries, fertilizing them and placing them back in her uterus. But both options carry risks and are very expensive, and if my patient did not have the money, she would be out of luck.
        I wanted her to understand the implications of her decision.
        ''What if your children died in a fire? Would you want more children?'' I asked, a horrible to question to put to a pregnant mother.
        No, she said.
        ''What if the relationship you're in now ended and you met someone else? Would you change your mind?''
        Still no.
        My patient's request wasn't unreasonable. She was choosing a form of birth control favored by millions of other American women. For her, I just felt it was a bad choice because in 15 years, much could change: her children might go off to college, she might be remarried, she could have a higher income. She might want a fourth child by then, and with excellent reversible birth control options like the intrauterine device, there was no need for her to take a risk with a tubal ligation.
        ''Treating people as rational adults means letting them do things they may bitterly regret later,'' wrote Piers M. Benn, a medical ethicist at Imperial College London and the lead author of a paper on sterilizing young, childless women, published last year in The British Medical Journal.
        If society let a person ruin her health by drinking a bottle of whiskey a day, Dr. Benn wrote, ''it might be reasonable to ask what is so special about voluntary sterilization.''
        He is right in the abstract. Practically though, my hands would do the pulling, tying and cutting that changed a woman's life in a fundamental way. Despite free will on her part, I would feel culpable if my actions made her life worse.
        ''There are no clear-cut rules or guidelines that physicians can fall back on,'' said Daniel Wikler, an ethicist and professor at the Harvard School of Public Health.
        In the end, I decided my patient's request was reasonable. I hope the surgery gives her a feeling of control in her life and relieves some anxiety. If years from now she decides she wants more children, I'll tell her what I think her best options are and try to talk her out of any bad ideas.
        CASES
      