
        There has been a lot of debate about complex bidding systems. The scientists want to reach the best contract all of the time and do not care what artificiality is required to achieve that goal as often as possible.
        But most players prefer to compete against pairs using methods that they understand. Also, if bridge is ever going to appear on television, the players must be using a natural system with a minimum of conventional aids.
        Sometimes, though, too much science helps the opponents. The diagramed deal occurred during the last round of the Bill Keohane North American Swiss Teams in Hawaii last month. Before this round began, Carolyn Lynch of Scottsdale, Ariz.; Dennis Dawson of Santa Fe, N.M.; David Berkowitz and Larry Cohen of Boca Raton, Fla.; and Mike Passell and Eddie Wold of Las Vegas had 112 victory points.
        Tony Kasday of Puyallup, Wash.; Disa Eythorsdottir of Huntsville, Ala.; and Jon Baldursson, Bjarni Einarsson, Sigurbjorn Haraldsson and Thorlakur Jonsson from Iceland were at 111.67.
        And Jim Mahaffey of Winter Park, Fla.; Mark Lair of Canyon, Tex.; Zhao Jie and Fu Zhong from China; and Peter Bertheau and Fredrik Nystrom from Sweden had 111.14.
        The Lynch team lost in the last round by 14 victory points to 6. The match between Kasday and Mahaffey would decide the outcome.
        Six diamonds by South was the contract at both tables. The Kasday declarer was favored by the opening lead of the spade jack. He won in his hand and tried the trump finesse. It lost, but later South threw a heart on dummy's 13th spade and took four spades, one heart, three diamonds and four clubs for plus 920.
        In the given auction three clubs asked for extra information. Three spades described 3-2-4-4 distribution. Four diamonds set the trump suit. Four spades promised that ace and denied the heart ace. Four no-trump was Roman Key Card Blackwood, the reply showing two key cards (two aces, or one ace and the trump king) but denying the trump queen.
        Baldursson (West), knowing that the heart ace was on his left, led the heart jack. Now look at matters from South's point of view.
        An underlead of a king against a small slam is not uncommon. So putting in dummy's heart queen has a lot going for it and works with this layout. But Zhao, the declarer, realized that he had a chance to make the contract even if East held both red-suit kings. He went up with dummy's heart ace, then tried to run his clubs, discarding hearts from the board.
        When West ruffed the fourth club, South overruffed on the board, played a spade to his hand and took the diamond finesse. But East produced the king and returned a heart to his partner's king for down one, minus 50, and a gain of 13 international match points for the Kasday team.
        Kasday defeated Mahaffey by 17 victory points to 3 to take the title, with Lynch second and Mahaffey third.
        Bridge
      