
        THE last time McDonald's made fashion headlines was for a makeover that never happened. That was last year, when it hired an image consultant to recruit a big-name designer to update its uniforms, but the idea was later dropped.
        McDonald's still likes fashion, though, and on Tuesday it held a runway show at a SoHo event space to promote its holiday gift cards as fashion accessories. Following the popularity of ''Project Runway,'' fashion has become a promotional vehicle for just about anything in need of a hipper image.
        ''Gift cards are like cellphones or handbags,'' said Shannelle Armstrong, a McDonald's spokeswoman. ''They say a lot about the person who gives one to you.''
        Last December, McDonald's sold $40 million worth of gift cards, without regard to customers' ensembles. That this year's card is more stylish -- buying Big Macs with cachet -- seems a stretch to rival Mattel's recent expansion into ''fashion editor'' versions of Barbie and Ken.
        The show included only five looks, four of which were retro T-shirts. The highlight was a dress made of about 300 interlocked gift cards, some sprinkled with crystals, by the ''Project Runway'' alumnus Jay McCarroll and modeled by the singer Kelis. Imagine a humble homage to the gold American Express-card dress worn by the costume designer Lizzy Gardiner in 1995 when she and Tim Chappel won an Academy Award for ''The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert.''
        McDonald's plans to sell Mr. McCarroll's design on eBay to benefit the Ronald McDonald House Charities, with an auction beginning next Monday.
        ''It's not as uncomfortable as it looks,'' Kelis said.
        The fashion types who showed up seemed unimpressed. Patrick McDonald, the Paper magazine writer and a fashion-show fixture recognizable by his long sideburns and outlandish suits (on this occasion, distressed herringbone), said he came, well, because of his name.
        ''I've only been to McDonald's once in my life,'' Mr. McDonald said. ''That was to use the restroom.''
        Front Row
      