
        Iranians went to the polls Friday in large numbers, which analysts said could be good news for reformers and could work against the hard-line president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
        The elections -- expected to be a test of whether the president still has popular support -- were for city councils around the country and for the 86-member Assembly of Experts, a largely inactive group that has the power to replace the country's supreme leader.
        Reformist politicians running in Tehran called on people to vote for them and against what they called the radical policies of Mr. Ahmadinejad, whose adamant refusal to end a nuclear power program has led to calls for United Nations sanctions.
        Final results are not expected until Sunday for the Assembly of Experts and until Monday for the local councils.
        Although there was no tally of the percentage of voters who turned out, Mojtaba Samareh-Hashemi, the deputy interior minister in charge of elections, said that he had spoken with the governors general, leaders of Iran's regions, and that the turnout appeared to be very strong.
        In addition, voting time was extended by three hours Friday because of long queues at polling stations, the ISNA news agency said, quoting an Interior Ministry official.
        In Tehran, many voters said they were casting ballots for reformers, not out of devotion, but because they wanted more moderate figures to confront Mr. Ahmadinejad.
        Sorour Soroush, 44, was one. ''I do not think we should take this nuclear program that far,'' she said at a polling station near the eastern Imam Hossein square.
        But Masoumeh Zoghi, 55, a retired schoolteacher who said her pension had increased to $235 a month from $136, explained that she was voting for candidates for Tehran's City Council that the president was believed to back.
        ''Mr. Ahmadinejad has been very efficient since he was elected,'' she said. ''None of the previous governments had increased our salary so much.''
        City councils in Iran exercise substantial political leverage, especially here in the capital. They appoint the mayors, who run the local governments and control the budgets.
        The Assembly of Experts has not used its power to replace the supreme leader since selecting the current leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, in 1989. Still, the election carries symbolic importance.
        Veteran politician Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani -- a pragmatist who challenged Mr. Ahmadinejad for president in 2005 -- is leading a slate that opposes one led by a senior cleric, Mohammad Taqi Mesbah-Yazdi, who is Mr. Ahmadinejad's mentor and has often spoken against democracy.
        The turnout in the last city elections in Tehran, in 2003, was only 12 percent after voters who had brought reformers to power stayed home out of disappointment in their performance in government. That brought the radicals to power, and they appointed Mr. Ahmadinejad as mayor and later nominated him for president.
        That sequence of events appeared to inspire one voter, a 55-year-old photographer who gave only his first name, Farzin, for fear of retribution, and who said his vote for the reformers was a choice between ''bad and worse.''
        ''For 28 years I stayed away from the polls, but I think we made a mistake,'' he said. ''We might be able to help bring more moderate forces and change the future for our children.''
      