
        AirTran Holdings is roughly a tenth the size of its main competitor, Delta Air Lines. So AirTran executives would seem unlikely cheerleaders of a potential merger that would make Delta 60 percent larger.
        But the recent $8.5 billion takeover offer for Delta by US Airways has found a fan in Joseph B. Leonard, chief executive at AirTran, which, like Delta, flies routes across the Southeast from its hub in Atlanta.
        ''I'm rooting for it,'' Mr. Leonard said yesterday in an interview, after announcing his own proposed takeover of Midwest Air, an airline based in Oak Creek, Ill., for $290 million.
        Mr. Leonard may relish his role as underdog but that is not why he hopes the carriers merge -- he just wants to see fewer jets in the sky. After all, US Airways' proposed takeover would reduce the two airlines' combined jet fleet about 10 percent.
        That, in turn, would allow the merged Delta -- and AirTran -- to raise fares on many routes, significantly increasing profits.
        ''It doesn't take much,'' he said.
        The prospect of higher profits has stimulated a new round of merger talks in the industry, whose fortunes have started to improve after more than $30 billion in losses over the last five years.
        Discussions about a possible deal between United Airlines and Continental Airlines came to light this week. And if one big merger goes through, other airlines will probably feel compelled to pair off as well or wind up at a competitive disadvantage because they have higher costs or smaller route networks.
        But less financial misery for airlines often means more bad news for their passengers -- since, in this business, misery tends to be a zero-sum game.
        Fewer planes would lead, certainly in the short term, to more-crowded flights and higher fares.
        Airline mergers are already on the political radar screen. Concerned about rising fares and the potential for reduced air service to small communities, Representative James L. Oberstar, Democrat of Minnesota, the next chairman of the House Committee on Commerce and Transportation, said yesterday that the Justice Department should block any major airline merger.
        If it does not, Mr. Oberstar said, he would call hearings before his committee to consider action to block such mergers (three steps are necessary to approve an airline deal: the Transportation Department must determine that a merger is financially viable, the Federal Aviation Administration must approve a certificate of safety, and the Justice Department must determine that there are no antitrust issues).
        Mr. Oberstar said the public could be harmed only by the sort of large mergers contemplated by US Airways and by United and Continental, and that those in turn would lead to other mergers.
        ''I don't think there's any benefit from mergers except for the benefit of stockholders and airline officials,'' Mr. Oberstar said. ''There is no benefit to the traveling public.''
        Mr. Oberstar's district is centered on Duluth, considerably north of the headquarters of Northwest Airlines, which are near Minneapolis-St. Paul, but he is sensitive to the desires of his home state's airline to remain independent. Northwest, which has lucrative Asian routes but is operating in bankruptcy, could be vulnerable to a takeover if Delta succumbs to US Airways.
        The industry's recent history serves to bolster Mr. Oberstar's argument.
        The domestic airlines' fleet shrank about 12 percent from 2000 to 2005, the Transportation Department reported, to 3,938 big jets from 4,462. That, in combination with an improving economy, permitted airlines to raise fares about 15 percent over the last year.
        And the smaller fleet will continue to help prop up prices for an industry still heavily in debt and vulnerable to the next economic downturn. The Transportation Department does not expect the fleet to return to its year 2000 size until 2011, as most deliveries of jetliners are scheduled to occur outside the United States.
        Airlines have also cut costs and jobs to stay afloat. Big network carriers have cut their combined payrolls to 264,000 workers in September 2006 from about 420,000 in September 2001, a 37 percent cut, according to the Transportation Department. And many of those remaining workers are being paid about one third less.
        But whether consumers are always harmed by mergers is debatable. If a high-cost airline is acquired by another carrier, travelers may benefit.
        A study conducted by Clifford Winston, an economist at the Brookings Institution, found that travelers would suffer, not surprisingly, if a number of airlines left the business. For example, in the year 2000, travelers would have lost $19.6 billion, attributable to higher air fares and less-frequent service, if Southwest Airlines did not exist.
        But he also found that customers would have benefited over all that year, by about $3.6 billion, if US Airways had stopped operating, because its service probably would have been replaced by lower-fare airlines with more-frequent service.
        He also found that travelers would have benefited by $3.7 billion if American had left the business, and $2.4 billion if Continental had left.
        It was an academic exercise, and one intended to measure the loss of only a single airline at a time, but one that shows that some airlines tend to reduce industry fares while others prop them up.
        To be sure, a more recent study would lead to different results, because US Airways and other airlines have revamped in recent years.
        ''It really matters who you lose and who comes in to take their place,'' Mr. Winston said.
        Any price increases that airlines are able to push through as a result of mergers could also end up being relatively short term. Southwest, AirTran, JetBlue Airways and other low-cost airlines have collectively grown to about 35 percent of the industry from about 10 percent in 1990, said Daniel M. Kasper, a managing director at LECG, a consulting firm.
        And those carriers are growing as the bigger, established airlines shrink. If history is any guide, Southwest and the others can be counted on to start flying routes where US Airways or other network carriers reduce service.
        ''The market is perfectly capable of sorting these things out,'' Mr. Kasper said.
        While some in the industry insist there is too much airline capacity, Mr. Kasper said the problem was that too much of the capacity remained in the hands of older network carriers. More cutbacks by these airlines would help hasten that shift, he added, increasing the number of seats available on low-cost airlines.
        Domestic air fares as of last year were roughly the same as in 1988, the Air Transport Association said, and when adjusted for inflation, fares have been falling steadily for decades as bigger and more-efficient airplanes reduced costs and spurred competition.
        More recently, consumers have kept fares from rising by using the Internet to shop. Consumers' ability to compare American Airlines' prices, say, with Southwest's has kept fares from rising faster this last year.
        In coming days, much of the industry will be waiting to see if US Airways is able to persuade Delta's unsecured creditors to help press its case. Those creditors, whose claims will convert into common stock that controls the company after Delta's exit from bankruptcy, can demand that Delta permit US Airways to inspect its books and otherwise research the proposed takeover.
        Delta's management opposes the deal and plans to file its stand-alone plan in bankruptcy court next week. Delta claims soared about 50 percent after the US Airways offer was made Nov. 15. Delta executives face pressure to present a plan that could justify something close to that higher value.
        Just as crucially, Delta management is expected to raise concerns about the US Airways proposal, especially its ability to pass muster with antitrust regulators.
        ''We are skeptical,'' Ed Bastian, Delta's chief financial officer, said in an interview.
        Mr. Kasper, the consultant, said that regulators would try to determine whether any competition lost because of the merger would be replaced within two years. Delta and US Airways own the two New York shuttle operations to Boston and Washington, and presumably one of them would have to be sold. And US Airways said the two airlines dominate only a relatively small number of their combined markets.
        Delta management's success at resisting US Airways ''could be the tipping point,'' that either spurs more deals or ends the industry merger talk, said the chief executive of another big airline, who asked not to be identified because his company could end up in merger negotiations, too.
        ''There's a chance nothing will get done,'' he said.
        Correction:  December 16, 2006, Saturday  Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Thursday about possible consolidation within the airline industry misidentified the location of the headquarters of Midwest Airlines, which has received a takeover offer from AirTrans Holdings. It is Oak Creek, Wis. -- not Illinois. The article also misidentified the House committee that will be led in the next Congress by Representative James L Oberstar, Democrat of Minnesota, who said the Justice Department should block any major airline merger. It is the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure -- not on Commerce and Transportation.
      