
        Content triumphed over form in a program presented by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater on Wednesday night at City Center. After a decade or so of increasingly hectic, high-energy plotless choreography, John Butler's ''Portrait of Billie'' looked mighty good. Created in 1959 as a vehicle for Carmen de Lavallade, the great dance actress, the piece follows the singer Billie Holiday from stardom to drug-addled solitude.
        ''Portrait of Billie,'' set to four songs that Holiday made famous, is a signature piece by Mr. Butler, who died in 1993 and has largely been forgotten except by the Ailey company. He was known for his early blending of ballet and modern dance, for sometimes melodramatic storytelling and for his championing of black performers. This new restaging by Ms. de Lavallade and Masazumi Chaya suggests that he was capable of unexpected subtlety and economy.
        Mr. Butler could not quite evoke the haunting pain of the song ''No More.'' But the rest of the piece flickers with Holiday's complex personality, interpreted on Wednesday by Asha Thomas with sensitivity to the twined threads of ambition, yearning and wrecked subservience, though Billie's final debasement could have used a little less truculence. Clifton Brown was Billie's Man, sensual and cynical in equal part.
        With the exception of Ailey's ''Revelations,'' the balance of the program offered ample evidence of how form has overtaken content in recent years. David Parsons's ''Shining Star'' is a funny, festive but somewhat condescending party of a program opener. Hans van Manen's ''Solo,'' a series of solos strongly danced by Guillermo Asca, Jamar Roberts and Antonio Douthit, is all fidget to fidgety Bach. Ulysses Dove's ''Episodes'' is, like his ''Vespers,'' an exercise in hurling dancers along diagonals to eventually tedious percussive music, this time by Robert Ruggieri. Blessedly, there were always the dynamic Ailey dancers to invest the choreography with extra heart.
        The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater performs through Dec. 31 at City Center, West 55th Street between Sixth and Seventh Avenues, Manhattan, (212) 581-1212.
        DANCE REVIEW
      