
        A bill establishing civil unions in New Jersey that would extend the legal benefits of marriage to same-sex couples was approved by the Senate Judiciary Committee on Monday.
        The full Senate and Assembly are expected to vote on the measure Thursday, 10 days after it was introduced.
        The Judiciary Committee heard only a few witnesses, making the hearing a telescoped version of the four-hour hearing on the companion bill held by an Assembly committee last week.
        The civil union bill is the Legislature's response to a State Supreme Court ruling on Oct. 25 requiring the state to guarantee gay and lesbian couples the same rights given to heterosexual couples. The court said it was up to the Legislature to decide whether to call the new legal arrangement marriage or something else.
        The civil union legislation has been criticized by advocates of same-sex marriage and by socially conservative groups. They have both urged the Legislature to consider its options more deliberately.
        ''They're changing 3,000 years of culture and history in 10 days,'' said John Tomicki, the president of the New Jersey Coalition to Preserve and Protect Marriage. ''What I believe they're doing is trying to get it as a political issue off the table quickly.''
        Steven Goldstein, the chairman of Garden State Equality, the organization leading the campaign for full-fledged marriage for same-sex couples, said of the legislation: ''It's not marriage equality. We're terribly disappointed. But you could call this civil unions plus.''
        Mr. Goldstein said the New Jersey legislation, unlike laws in Connecticut and Vermont that legalized same-sex unions, did not include language defining marriage as the union of a man and a woman. He also noted that the New Jersey legislation would establish a commission to monitor the working of the new law for compliance with the Supreme Court's directive.
        New Jersey would become the fifth state to recognize civil unions. Only Massachusetts allows same-sex couples to marry.
        Two Republican committee members, Gerald Cardinale of Bergen County and Joseph M. Kyrillos Jr. of Monmouth County, opposed the civil union bill.
      