
        The front window of Davisons & Company, a small storefront on Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn, bears portraits of two men. One is Nissim Isaac David, an Iraqi Jew who fled Iraq in 1946, leaving behind a store in Baghdad to set up an import-export business in New York. The other is his grandson Michael Rakowitz, 33, an artist and, for the last two months, a shopkeeper himself.
        Mr. Rakowitz set up the store in October, in donated space, to explore the complexities and frustrations of international commerce during wartime. His goal was simple: to import a shipment of dates -- the ancient fruit that, besides oil, is Iraq's signature product -- and to sell the dates in America, as his grandfather had done. After much uncertainty and complications in Jordan and Syria and at United States Customs, the dates finally arrived this month. Today is Mr. Rakowitz's last day in business, selling the sweet, smoky fruit in carefully rationed bags to make sure there are enough to go around.
        Iraqi dates, Mr. Rakowitz said last week, sitting behind a desk in the store, are a distinctive national product on a par with Cuban cigars. But in recent decades, amid war, dictatorship and trade sanctions, they have been just as hard to find in the United States.
        Often, Mr. Rakowitz said, dates have been shipped out of Iraq to be processed into syrup elsewhere, then labeled as products of Lebanon, the United Arab Emirates or even the Netherlands, with middlemen in those countries taking a cut of the Iraqi growers' profits.
        ''I found it very poetic, in a dark way, that all these cans were veiled, that they were not able to say where they were from,'' Mr. Rakowitz said. ''I imagine this happens to a lot of other things in the world, but I'm very interested in this word 'Iraqi' being this demonized thing.''
        With money from Creative Time, an arts group, Mr. Rakowitz set out to import dates that, for the first time in years, would be clearly labeled as products of Iraq. Their tortured path, which Mr. Rakowitz chronicled on a blog on the organization's Web site, and which was reported in The Brooklyn Paper, a weekly, culminated when the dates arrived at 529 Atlantic Avenue, near Third Avenue, in two large yellow shipping boxes.
        For Mr. Rakowitz, the moment was not entirely joyous. ''I couldn't do anything but cry looking at them, in a way,'' he said. ''They became something else that I couldn't have predicted at the outset. These dates were representative of every person who wasn't able to get out.''
        Still, customers have been coming, and liking what they find. ''I think food connects people,'' said Leslie Barnett, from Park Slope, who was buying dates for a teacher last week. ''You share a meal with someone, and it's a symbolic gesture. So, that he chose to work with food, it's connecting us.''
        JAKE MOONEY
        NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: BOERUM HILL
      