
        Of all the Iraqi expatriates who returned to rule, rebuild and profit from their country after the invasion, none have fallen as far as Aiham Alsammarae, who was once the minister of electricity but now spends his days consumed with bitterness in a Baghdad jail as his lawyers fight multiple charges of corruption against him.
        Mr. Alsammarae, an American citizen who lived in the Chicago area and built a thriving engineering firm there, is the only cabinet-level Iraqi official to be convicted and jailed for misusing money during his time in office. Four months ago, hearing that he was being accused of corruption, he walked into a Baghdad courthouse to find out if there were charges against him and was astonished to find himself placed under arrest pending trial. He has been in jail ever since.
        During an interview in that jail on Thursday, Mr. Alsammarae still had the swept-back, perfectly arranged hair and obsessively polished shoes of his days in power, but he wore a shapeless zippered jacket over a beige shirt and pants rather than one of his elegant suits. Possibly in deference to his former rank, his ''cell'' was a converted office with a computer, a refrigerator, a potted plant, a thin mattress and other amenities -- far better than what is provided to other prisoners in the jail.
        But Mr. Alsammarae is bitter because, he said, the United States has left him in his hour of need to the vagaries of an Iraqi court system that in many ways is still the opaque and frightening apparatus it was before the invasion. ''When somebody is giving his life to service as an American here, he should be dealt with in a different way,'' he said, complaining of what he called a lack of action by the American Embassy. ''If they did anything for me, I am not aware of it.''
        As if to help make his point, the Iraqi justice system still had Mr. Alsammarae in jail on Thursday, several days after an appeals court overturned his conviction, on Oct. 11, on the first of the counts against him, involving payments for a single electricity generator in the southern Iraq.
        An employee at the Central Criminal Court of Iraq confirmed that the 23-member appeals court had unanimously overturned the conviction but said that under Iraqi law, Mr. Alsammarae might have to remain in jail until the other charges against him were resolved.
        Mr. Alsammarae's case is caught in an extraordinarily complex web of events that include American-sponsored efforts to fight official corruption and to improve the Iraqi court system while at the same time allowing the courts to operate independently of American influence. Mr. Alsammarae also faces the burden of having long been suspected of corruption by Iraqi and American officials, and he has been the target of lashing criticism for years in the Iraqi news media.
        An American official in Baghdad familiar with the case said the embassy was in fact monitoring Mr. Alsammarae's situation closely.
        ''They have done everything they can to ensure his safety and fair treatment, but at the same time cannot interfere in a legitimate Iraqi court process,'' the official said.
        Iraqi officials were generally less restrained. Saadi Mehdi Ali, who currently serves as inspector general in the Electricity Ministry, said he had reviewed the papers on Mr. Alsammarae's cases.
        ''Believe me, all the cases in which Aiham is accused, they are correct,'' he said. ''He is accused with facts.''
        The cases involving Mr. Alsammarae began with investigations by the Commission on Public Integrity, an Iraqi organization independent of the government that was created by the United States. The commission has been praised by some officials as a much-needed breath of reform in a country long riddled by corruption, and derided by others as overzealous and politically motivated.
        ''It's politics,'' said Mr. Alsammarae, a secular Sunni Arab who was what he described as a midlevel member of Saddam Hussein's governing Baath Party as a student in the 1970s. The commission and the court system have both been accused of falling under the influence of Shiite politicians and Shiite-run militias.
        Mr. Alsammarae arrived in Iraq just after the American invasion in 2003, looking for business opportunities. He was originally appointed electricity minister by L. Paul Bremer III, the leader of the American occupation authority, in August 2003. He stayed on until May 2005 in the Iraqi government that followed, run by Prime Minister Ayad Allawi.
        Mr. Allawi, who has previously suggested publicly that the Commission on Public Integrity may have a political agenda, said through a colleague on Thursday that he stood by those remarks.
        Ali Shbot, a spokesman for the commission, which is run by Rathi al-Rathi, said that those charges were ludicrous and that the commission was investigating politicians of all stripes. He said that of roughly 90 cabinet-level officials in previous Iraqi governments since the invasion, 18 have received either arrest warrants or subpoenas.
        All but a few of those officials remain at large, having fled the country or gone into hiding. Mr. Shbot said there were also active corruption cases against about 80 former officials -- deputy ministers, directors general or senior ministry advisers -- at least some of whom are still in Iraq. In the same jail in Baghdad's protected Green Zone, a former deputy finance minister, Kareem Hmeed Faraj, is serving a three-year sentence.
        But despite the general view that Iraqi governments have been corrupt, it is the sheer number of those cases that disturbs some officials who say they believe that politics is indeed coming into play.
        ''I applaud the notion of public integrity,'' said a senior Iraqi official who has followed the case and who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of prejudicing the cases. ''But the problem with these guys, they are highly politicized. My view is that Judge Rathi is way out of his place.''
        But in a sign of the difficulties the former electricity minister faces, the official added, ''I suspect that Aiham Alsammarae is a crook.''
        THE REACH OF WAR
      