
        After years of delays, the Food and Drug Administration yesterday approved a test for a fatal parasitic infection that is common in Latin America and increasingly prevalent in the United States blood supply.
        The nation's major blood banks said they would quickly adopt the test for the ailment, Chagas disease, which in Latin America is usually transmitted by the bite of a parasite-carrying insect called the kissing bug, but can also be passed from mother to child or through blood transfusion or organ donation.
        About 100,000 people in the United States are thought to be infected with Chagas disease, and the American Red Cross estimated that in the Los Angeles area, the chance of getting a unit of potentially infected blood is one in 2,000, compared to the one in 10,000 estimated a decade ago.
        Not all units of blood that test positive for antibodies to the Chagas parasite will pass the disease, but it is impossible to tell which ones will, so all that are infected must be thrown out, a Red Cross scientist said.
        The announcement that a test by Ortho-Clinical Diagnostics, a Johnson & Johnson company, had been approved is ''great news,'' said Dr. Stuart J. Kahn, a Chagas expert at the Infectious Disease Research Institute in Seattle who is not involved in the competing tests being created for the disease.
        ''And it's certainly a bit overdue,'' Dr. Kahn added. ''People have been waiting for this for a while now.''
        In addition to protecting the blood supply, the tests will also give a more accurate idea of the extent of Chagas disease in the United States. The numbers of infections are assumed to be increasing as a result of immigration from the region that stretches from southern Mexico to northern Argentina. Up to 20 million people are believed to be infected there.
        ''The 100,000 figure is a rough estimate, but we really don't know,'' said Dr. James H. Maguire, a former chief of the parasitic diseases branch at the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. ''Most people don't know they're infected.''
        Discovering new cases will pose a quandary for doctors and patients: there is not yet any official C.D.C. guidance on what to tell people who are infected but appear healthy.
        The only treatments are two drugs, nifurtimox and benznidazole, with very unpleasant side effects. They cure up to 95 percent of recently infected children, but less than 10 percent of adults with long-dormant infections, said Dr. Louis V. Kirchhoff, a leading Chagas expert at the University of Iowa. Complicating matters, it is nearly impossible to tell when treatment has worked because the antibodies linger in the blood.
        Also, the course of the disease is mysterious. Only about 1 percent of those infected show immediate symptoms, which can include fever, malaise and swelling. Most appear to recover, although a few infants and people with suppressed immune systems suffer fatal brain swelling.
        About 10 percent to 25 percent of all those infected develop a dormant form that festers in the nerve cells of the heart and gut for 10 to 30 years and then kills suddenly by heart failure or a ruptured intestine.
        Blood banks have wanted an accurate, affordable Chagas test since 1988, when the first two known cases were passed by blood donors in the United States.
        ''We're in favor of anything that improves the safety of the blood supply,'' said Jennifer Garfinkel, a spokeswoman for the American Association of Blood Banks.
        But because there have been so few known cases, experts said, there was little pressure on the Food and Drug Administration to ask for a test, or on the diagnostics industry to develop one.
        Only 12 cases of the disease are known to have been transmitted in North America, 7 by blood donation and 5 by organ transplant.
        Meanwhile, tests for other diseases, including the West Nile virus and SARS, were more urgent, and the agency did not officially invite manufacturers to submit Chagas tests until 2002.
        With the test available, the next step will be for the centers to decide what advice to give to people who test positive. Chagas experts from North and South America agree that children should be treated with the drugs, Dr. Kirchhoff said. (Children do not donate blood, but would be tested if their mothers tested positive.) Older patients should be checked by cardiologists for signs of incipient heart disease, but Dr. Kirchhoff said there was too little data to know with certainty when to treat symptom-free adults.
      