
        Responding to complaints that the costs of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act were too high, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board proposed a standard yesterday aimed at allowing auditors to do less work -- and charge less money -- when assessing internal controls over financial reporting.
        The changes would ''eliminate unnecessary requirements while preserving the principles of the standard,'' the chairman of the oversight board, Mark W. Olson, said.
        The new rule, which is expected to be adopted this spring after public comment, is much shorter than the old standard, coming in at 65 pages rather than 180. It encourages auditors to use their judgment in deciding which internal controls should be reviewed, focusing on controls where the risk of significant misstatements is the highest.
        The move came a few days after the Securities and Exchange Commission proposed rules aimed at reducing the amount of money companies needed to spend in evaluating their own controls. It was developed after extensive consultation with the commission.
        ''The P.C.A.O.B.'s proposal to repeal the unduly expensive and inefficient auditing standard under Section 404 of Sarbanes-Oxley -- and to replace that standard with one that strengthens investor protection by refocusing resources on what truly matters to the integrity of financial statements -- is an exceptionally positive step for both investors and for America's capital markets,'' the chairman of the S.E.C, Christopher Cox, said.
        The Sarbanes-Oxley Act, passed by Congress in 2002 in the wake of the Enron and WorldCom accounting scandals, required companies to assess the quality of their internal financial controls and said auditors should report on the quality of the controls. At the time, that requirement, contained in Section 404 of the act, was not viewed as particularly important because laws that had been on the books for decades required companies to have strong internal controls.
        What happened, however, was that numerous companies reported inadequate controls and many complained about the cost of the audits to assess them.
        Last year, the S.E.C. and the board put out interpretations of the rules aimed at lowering the costs, but companies said that the auditors did not change their practices. A small business advisory committee appointed by William H. Donaldson, then the chairman of the S.E.C., proposed making most companies exempt from the rules, which would apply fully only to the largest companies, with slightly smaller companies being subjected to lesser rules.
        That approach was rejected by the board yesterday. It said auditors should pay attention to the size and complexity of companies, but the same rules should apply to all.
        As the political pressures grew, even Senator Paul S. Sarbanes, Democrat of Maryland, and Representative Michael G. Oxley, Republican of Ohio, the chief authors of the law, called on the board to take action.
        ''We have done that to the best of our ability,'' Mr. Olson said yesterday. ''We've responded to the message we were hearing loud and clear.''
        He declined to forecast whether political pressures would ease. ''The next move is up to the Congress,'' he said.
        Asked who he expected to object, he replied: ''If I were to guess, it would be from either end of the spectrum. It would come either from those who would like large groups of companies totally relieved of 404 compliance, or from some who think we might go too far. The great middle ground will see we have significantly changed the standard to make it more risk-based and principles-based.''
        An emphasis of the proposed new standard is that it calls on auditors to use a ''top-down'' approach and identify the areas where fraud or errors are most likely.
        ''This will provide the auditor with flexibility to avoid unnecessary testing,'' said Thomas Ray, the chief auditor of the oversight board.
        That flexibility comes in large part from using what is called ''risk-based'' auditing, a term some think was abused before the scandals erupted.
        ''In the 90s, risk-based auditing became an excuse to do less work,'' said Charles D. Niemeier, a member of the oversight board and a former chief accountant at the S.E.C.'s enforcement division. ''That is all it was.'' But he said the risk-based approach being urged now was different and deserved support.
        The board said it would seek public comment for 90 days, after which it would vote on a new rule, which might contain changes in response to the comments. The rule would then need approval of the S.E.C.
        That means it will be some time before any changes caused by the rule are felt. Willis D. Gradison, a board member who was formerly a Republican congressman from Ohio, said he thought large companies would see cost savings in the spring of 2008. Smaller ones, which have yet to be required to comply with the law, would not benefit until the spring of 2009, because the first-year costs are usually the highest, he said.
        Those calling for change have blamed Section 404 for leading American companies to go private and for keeping foreign companies from listing securities in the United States.
        ''Hopefully, this will help our capital markets,'' said Conrad W. Hewitt, the chief accountant of the S.E.C. ''It is a right step forward. Everybody knows it is needed.''
        Correction:  December 21, 2006, Thursday  An article in Business Day yesterday about changes in auditing rules proposed by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board misstated the length of time for public comments on the rules. It is 70 days, not 90.
      