
        There was a point Monday night when Knicks Coach Isiah Thomas told his players to sit in front of him on the bench. The request was not particularly odd, but the reason was unusual.
        ''I said I need everybody sitting in front of me so I know who's who and where I'm supposed to put them,'' Thomas recalled Tuesday, ''because everybody's playing out of position.''
        The Knicks had eight players for their 97-96 overtime victory over the Utah Jazz. Four others were suspended for their parts in Saturday's brawl. Two others were injured. Thomas called it ''the most challenging game I ever coached.''
        The roster will get a small boost when center Jerome James returns from a one-game suspension Wednesday night against the Charlotte Bobcats. But the Knicks remain thin in the backcourt. Steve Francis said he would try to accelerate his return from knee tendinitis, but he is not ready. Neither Francis nor Quentin Richardson (back spasms) are expected to be available.
        That means the Knicks will again have only two guards in uniform. And the forwards David Lee and Renaldo Balkman will again spend time in the backcourt, simply to give Stephon Marbury and Jamal Crawford an occasional rest.
        Thomas said it was not worth signing a free agent because the player would not have much time to get acclimated. The Knicks have one more full practice this week and three games to play between now and Saturday night. By the time they play again, next Wednesday, the swingman Jared Jeffries will be back from his suspension. Richardson should be back in a matter of days.
        But Thomas will have a limited roster for the rest of the week. To prepare, he used odd lineups at practice Tuesday -- for example, holding Jeffries out of the starting lineup. The Knicks have one tough opponent this week -- the Chicago Bulls (14-10) -- and two bottom dwellers, Charlotte (6-17) and Philadelphia (5-18), which traded its star Allen Iverson on Tuesday.
        The Knicks are encouraged by their stunning victory over the mighty Jazz, and by the re-emergence of Marbury, their beleaguered point guard. Marbury posted his two highest-scoring games of the season, with 29 points against the Jazz and 31 points in Saturday's loss to Denver.
        Eddy Curry, the Knicks' first option for the last month, struggled both games, and the offense shifted back toward Marbury.
        ''He's battling,'' Thomas said. ''He's fighting for who he is as a player and who he is as a person.'' Noting that Marbury has overcome obstacles throughout his life, Thomas added: ''That inner fight, that inner fire, it's still got to be in there somewhere. And hopefully, he's tapping back into it and finding it.''
        BASKETBALL
      