
        The Preserve at Botany Bay
        WHAT -- Caribbean resort and residential development.
        WHERE -- St. Thomas in the United States Virgin Islands.
        AMENITIES -- A beach club, a spa and a fitness center, among others.
        PRICES -- Available home sites from $975,000; villa units from $2.5 million.
        STATUS -- Construction began last summer and is planned to be completed in three to five years.
        DEVELOPERS -- Timbers Resorts and SV Capital.
        CONTACT -- (866) 963-5003 or www.thepreserveatbotanybay.com.
        DETAILS -- The 397-acre site of this development is at the western tip of St. Thomas, a 15-minute drive from the airport and far from the many large resorts there. Home sites, villas, residence club units and a boutique hotel are planned. There are to be 77 home sites of 1 to 14 acres each, and most will have water views. Also offering water views will be 20 buildings, each with two villa units that will each have a patio, a plunge pool and three or four bedrooms. In addition, a 30-unit residence club is planned; prices and details of the club have not yet been determined. There are three beaches at the development's site, and the beach club will include two swimming pools and a casual restaurant. A free-standing fine-dining restaurant is also planned, as well as the spa and fitness center, which will be in a two-story waterfront building.
        V at Lake Las Vegas
        WHAT -- Residential project in a resort area.
        WHERE -- Henderson, Nev.
        AMENITIES -- A clubhouse with a swimming pool and a fitness center, among others.
        PRICES -- Condominiums and town houses start around $700,000.
        STATUS -- The first collection of residences is planned for completion in September, and the rest are expected to be ready in the next couple of years.
        DEVELOPER -- Centex Destination Properties.
        CONTACT -- (702) 568-0605 or www.v-llv.com.
        DETAILS -- Less than 20 miles southeast of the Las Vegas Strip, this gated development is in the Lake Las Vegas resort area -- a northern Italian-styled cluster of hotels, casinos, residences and golf courses surrounding a 320-acre artificial lake. When construction is complete, it will offer 257 two- to three-bedroom condominiums and town houses in 36 buildings. The development, on 45 acres, overlooks the lake from the highest point in the area. The units, which will range from 1,300 to more than 2,300 square feet, will have balconies with wrought-iron railings, verandas, attached garages and gas fireplaces. The central clubhouse, with a three-tiered swimming pool, should be ready in February, and the area's village, which has shops and restaurants, is nearby. Fairways of a golf course designed by Jack Nicklaus surround the development, and owners are granted membership to it and another nearby course.
        NICK KAYE
        Breaking Ground is a weekly look at projects, planned or under construction, that include weekend or vacation homes.  Breaking Ground
      