
        The New Orleans Saints began the season as an emotional favorite, having been displaced a year earlier by Hurricane Katrina. Still, they were widely regarded as an underdog to reach the playoffs, or even produce a winning record.
        Drew Brees was in a similar position at the time. He possessed a saintly appeal, having signed with New Orleans as a free agent in the off-season despite its losing history and its tattered surroundings. But he was coming off surgery to his throwing shoulder that threatened to derail his career.
        After 14 games, the doubts about the Saints and Brees, which had been so closely intertwined, have faded away.
        The Saints (9-5) will face the Giants (7-7) on Sunday at Giants Stadium as champions of the National Football Conference South, having clinched the division last Sunday despite losing to the Washington Redskins, 16-10.
        Brees has been the centerpiece of their resurgence.
        ''You just keep doing things the right way and things are going to work out,'' Brees said Wednesday during a conference call. ''I think we all believed that. And it just started to come together.''
        Brees's gaudy statistics are as surprising as the Saints' turnaround from a 3-13 record in 2005. He is first in the National Football League in passing yards (4,240), second in touchdown passes (25) and third in passer rating (98.2). He was named to the Pro Bowl on Tuesday as the N.F.C. starter.
        Not bad for a player who was considered damaged goods less than a year ago.
        Brees tore his labrum while directing the Chargers' offense late in the 2005 season. San Diego, which was looking for an excuse to commit to its backup quarterback, Philip Rivers, allowed Brees to leave through free agency, ending a five-year partnership that included Brees's benching in 2003 and a Pro Bowl appearance the following season.
        When Brees signed a six-year, $60 million contract with the Saints in March, it seemed like a perfect match. Brees, who had surgery two months earlier, and the city of New Orleans were both on the mend.
        ''The transition for him has been significant,'' Sean Payton, the Saints' first-year coach, who was on the Giants' staff from 1999 to 2002, said on a conference call. ''He's leaving a city he's comfortable with. He's coming here to a city where a lot of people are leaving, not coming. And now he's going to take on a new offense, a new coaching staff, new teammates. And on top of that, his shoulder has just been operated on.''
        It was an equation that Brees welcomed, partly because he also wanted to be part of the rebuilding of New Orleans. He and his wife bought a house in the historic Uptown neighborhood, which had suffered wind damage in the hurricane.
        Brees's performances on Sundays have lifted the city's spirits. The Saints won five of their first six games, and as a division winner, they are guaranteed to play at home in their first playoff game since the 2000 season. The Saints are still playing for a first-round bye, so the Giants should not expect their starters to rest.
        Several Giants defenders said Wednesday that the key to stopping the Saints was not containing Reggie Bush, a first-year running back who has excelled as a receiver, or Marques Colston, a rookie wide receiver who has emerged as a top offensive threat. Brees, they said, is the engine that drives the league's top-ranked offense.
        ''This team has been very good at protecting the passer and the tempo and the way in which Brees gets rid of the ball,'' Giants Coach Tom Coughlin said. ''He's only been sacked 17 times. You know that he does get the ball out of his hands quickly. He gets it in the hands of the playmakers, and that has served them very well.''
        Brees has gotten the ball to playmakers so frequently that he is now chasing a slice of N.F.L. history. He is on pace to finish the season with 4,846 passing yards, which would be the second most in a season. His best season had been in 2005, when he threw for 3,576 yards in San Diego.
        Toward the end of his conference call, Brees was asked if he thought he would still be playing for the Chargers if he had not been injured.
        ''That's just the fact of the matter,'' Brees said.
        It is hard to imagine what the Saints and the city in which they play would be like today if Brees had not sustained the injury. It is equally hard to envision what Brees would be like today without the Saints and New Orleans.
        ''It was a fresh start for me,'' Brees said, ''just like it was for this city.''
        PRO FOOTBALL
      