
        A police officer fatally shot an armed 19-year-old during a struggle in the vestibule of a South Bronx apartment building last night, the police said. The police said that the officer fired five shots at the man, identified by his mother as Timur Person, and that at least one of them hit him in the chest.
        A friend of Mr. Person's who witnessed the shooting, Hector Suarez, said that Mr. Person had a gun tucked into his waistband. ''They were punching and kicking him,'' Mr. Suarez said. ''All I kept hearing was: 'Let go of the gun! Let go of the gun!' ''
        A loaded .380-caliber semiautomatic pistol was found at the scene, the police said.
        According to a preliminary account provided by the police, Mr. Person was with three other men in front of 1240 Walton Avenue when a sergeant and three officers from the 44th Precinct approached them about 8:15 p.m. It was not immediately clear why the officers approached, but the block is a high-crime area, and the officers were part of a ''conditions team'' that focuses on trouble spots, the police said.
        As the other men fled, Mr. Person ran into the building. One of the officers followed him, and the two began to struggle, the police said. They said the other three officers followed and joined in the struggle.
        Mr. Suarez said that an officer grabbed Mr. Person's pants leg and knocked him to the ground. He said that Mr. Person put his hands near the gun but did not pull it out. ''He was holding the gun to stay in his beltline,'' Mr. Suarez said.
        Mr. Person was pronounced dead at Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center.
        The shooting is the fourth by the police in less than a week and the first fatal police shooting since an unarmed man, Sean Bell, was killed by officers in Queens on Nov. 25, touching off citywide protests.
        Crowds who gathered at the scene of the shooting last night taunted the police and called them corrupt.
        A relative of Mr. Person's, Jannett Perez, said at the hospital that Mr. Person was trying to turn his life around. ''He was a good kid,'' she said. ''I was supposed to send him to a security class to get a certification.''
        Mr. Person's mother, Allene Person, said that Mr. Person, her youngest child, was two days shy of his 20th birthday.
        ''I can't cry,'' she said, banging her palms against the chain-link fence outside the hospital. ''I can't get the tears. I'm too angry.''
      