
        The New York Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, one of the three men who effectively control state government, said Tuesday evening that the Federal Bureau of Investigation was looking into his business interests.
        Mr. Bruno, 77, who will be the state's top Republican when Gov. George E. Pataki leaves office in less than two weeks, offered few details about the nature of the inquiry, which he said he was announcing because it had been leaked to reporters.
        He said that he has known of the inquiry since late spring, and that he recently retained a lawyer. He said the investigation ''appears to be related to my outside business interests,'' but added later that he was ''not sure'' if it involved any official actions he has taken as Senate leader. He said he was told that he was not a target of the investigation.
        Mr. Bruno said he did not believe that the inquiry would affect his ability to serve as majority leader.
        ''I am guilty of nothing, so why would it impact my ability to do anything?'' he said.
        The F.B.I. refused to confirm or deny any investigation. But one law enforcement official who has knowledge of the investigation and spoke on the condition of anonymity said that it focuses on Mr. Bruno and how his private business dealings may relate to his official position. The official said the investigation was still in the early stages.
        Mr. Bruno's statement rippled through Albany, where for the last 10 years he has held an iron grip on the fate of all legislation along with Governor Pataki and the Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver. And the inquiry comes as Albany awaits the inauguration of Eliot Spitzer, a Democrat who ran for governor on a pledge to clean up the ethics of the capital, on Jan. 1.
        Several Republican state senators said that they were unaware of the federal investigation when they re-elected Mr. Bruno as their majority leader just last month.
        ''Did we know?'' asked one Republican senator, who spoke anonymously because of his close ties to Mr. Bruno. ''We didn't. Would it have changed things if we'd known? Maybe. I would have definitely had more questions if I'd known this.''
        Governor Pataki, referring to the investigation, said on NY1 News, ''Hopefully, the senator has done everything right, and that will be what the conclusion is.''
        Mr. Bruno's announcement of the inquiry made him at least the 10th state lawmaker to be investigated, indicted or convicted in recent years.
        And it came as many in the Capitol were waiting to learn the fate of another top official, State Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi, a Democrat, who could be indicted by an Albany County grand jury as early as Friday for using state workers as chauffeurs and personal aides for his wife, a law-enforcement official said.
        Neither Mr. Bruno nor federal officials would say much about the investigation on Tuesday night. Mr. Bruno did say that the F.B.I. had issued subpoenas as part of it, and that he had gone to meet with the authorities.
        ''They're going into background over the last five, six years and relationships and business interests,'' Mr. Bruno said.
        Mr. Bruno has a consulting business, Capital Business Consultants L.L.C., which has the same address as his home in Rensselaer County, across the Hudson from Albany.
        Since selling his telecommunications equipment company, Coradian, in 1990 for about $10 million, Mr. Bruno has remained active in business, reporting income in most years from consulting arrangements as well as investments in real estate and stocks, according to financial disclosure reports he filed with the State Legislative Ethics Committee.
        Mr. Bruno has also reported earning money in recent years from consulting work for a Connecticut investment firm, Wright Investors' Service. The company's president told The New York Sun in 2003 that Mr. Bruno was paid a part-time salary for referring clients to Wright, that Wright did not manage money for New York State, and that Mr. Bruno's consulting did not involve his work as a senator.
        Paul M. Holstein, a spokesman for the Albany office of the F.B.I., declined to comment on questions regarding Mr. Bruno last night. ''We have no comment on any pending investigations or even about whether there is an investigation ongoing on Senator Bruno,'' said Mr. Holstein, who is a supervisory special agent of and chief division counsel for the F.B.I. ''We're not going to confirm that there is an investigation.''
        He referred questions about the matter to the United States attorney's office in Syracuse. Officials there did not return calls for comment last night.
        Mr. Bruno's lawyer, William J. Dreyer, also did not return telephone calls or respond to e-mail messages last night.
        A report in The New York Times on Saturday highlighted some of the ties between Mr. Bruno's private and public interests. It found that in recent years, Mr. Bruno has steered state money to a business linked to Jared E. Abbruzzese, a wealthy investor in the Albany area, while also investing in a different company affiliated with Mr. Abbruzzese.
        Mr. Bruno declined to say whether the inquiry was related to Mr. Abbruzzese.
        He said Tuesday evening that he had decided to announce the federal investigation publicly because ''I wanted to be upfront and assure that I have nothing to hide, and to avoid speculation, distortions or unfounded rumors.''
      