
        ''We tend to be interior and reflective and maybe not very funny and gay persons,'' the Finnish composer Kaija Saariaho said on Wednesday night at Avery Fisher Hall. Her comment came in answer to a question about why she and the Lebanese writer Amin Maalouf, who have written four somber, calmly intense major works together, seem to be such sympathetic collaborators. ''We are worried about the world around us,'' Ms. Saariaho added.
        She was appearing with the composer Steven Stucky, the host of the New York Philharmonic's admirable ''Hear and Now'' series, which offers audiences previews of works before their formal premieres in Philharmonic concerts. On this occasion David Robertson conducted the tryout performance of Ms. Saariaho's ''Adriana Songs'' with the mezzo-soprano Patricia Bardon in her Philharmonic debut. The official American premiere came Thursday night in a subscription series program along with music by Sibelius and Debussy.
        Ms. Saariaho adapted ''Adriana Songs,'' a work of nearly 30 minutes, from her second opera, ''Adriana Mater,'' which received its premiere in April at the National Opera in Paris, where she and her librettist, Mr. Maalouf, have long resided. And as Mr. Stucky suggested, the music, while haunting and eerily beautiful in its way, is pervasively dark.
        Though filled with surreal dream sequences, the story, set in the present day in a nameless country afflicted by war, is brutally simple and all too timely. Adriana, a young woman, is accosted and raped by a drunken man from her town, resulting in the birth of a boy. Seventeen years later, the rapist returns and the son vows to kill him. But the young man cannot do it. ''We are not avenged, but we are saved,'' Adriana sings in bitter relief at the end of the opera and in the final song.
        Essentially, the ''Adriana Songs,'' with French texts by Mr. Maalouf, are an exploration of the experience of bearing and raising a child in time of global hostilities and war. In the first song we encounter Adriana flushed with romantic confusion and fear; in the second, the young woman anxiously wonders whether the child she is bearing will be shaped by the blood of his violent father or by her own earnest devotion. Will he be Cain or Abel?
        Like many of Ms. Saariaho's scores, this one abounds in spectral music that explores often static but shimmering masses of sound. After a clanking, dissonant percussion burst begins the piece, the music just hovers for long stretches, with tremulous sustained tones, quietly flickering colors and eerie instrumental effects, like softly scraping strings.
        Yet Ms. Saariaho's ear is so acute and her imagination so vivid that the masses of sound she creates buzz with inner activity. The music evolves in heaving, essentially atonal swells, with fragments of melody and instrumental riffs sometimes coalescing into long thematic lines. Over this backdrop, the vocal lines emerge, urgent and plaintive, as if trying to escape the oceanic pull of the orchestra. Everything changes in the penultimate song, ''Rages,'' for orchestra only, which erupts with violent fits and dissonant frenzy.
        On both Wednesday and Thursday, Ms. Bardon gave a dark-hued, earthy and impassioned performance and Mr. Robertson drew a commanding, richly colored and sensitive reading from the Philharmonic.
        As usual, Mr. Robertson's programming instincts were excellent. He preceded Ms. Saariaho's piece with a French Impressionist work that prefigures her own sound world, Symphonic Fragments from Debussy's ''Martyrdom of Saint Sebastian.'' After intermission Mr. Robertson linked Ms. Saariaho to the Finnish modernist heritage with a gripping account of Sibelius's wonderfully obsessive and strange ''Night Ride and Sunrise.''
        The concert ended with more Debussy, ''La Mer,'' in a knockout performance that put all thoughts of misty musical sea pictures out of mind. Mr. Robertson presented the score as a glittering, rhythmically incisive and radical de facto symphony from the first decade of the 20th century, brilliantly performed.
        The program repeats tonight at 8 at Avery Fisher Hall; (212) 721-6500.
        MUSIC REVIEW
      