
        After enjoying many vacations together, it was only natural for the Liebermans and the Notricas to consider buying a second home as a team.
        Hidden Meadow Ranch, a luxury ranch resort in the White Mountains of eastern Arizona was selling one-sixth fractions of 3,600-square-foot, four-bedroom cabins. Weekend retreats had taken the couples there several times, but even a single share, which entitled owners to eight weeks of use a year, was more than any one family could use on their own. They decided to split the cost.
        ''It was practical when we started to look at how much time we would be using it,'' Becky Lieberman said, ''and that we would also be using it together anyway.''
        The two families set up a limited liability company to buy the property, allocated four weeks per couple and detailed who would get which master bedroom (one is larger) when they did travel together. Then they hammered out thorny issues like what would happen if someone died or got divorced. ''When my husband and I pass away,'' Michelle Notrica said, ''we put in a clause that the other family can buy us out.''
        Splitting a property among multiple owners may not only makes financial sense but may not even affect the amount of time spent at the property, since the typical vacation home owner only uses their second home just 39 nights a year, according to the National Association of Realtors.
        But beyond the financial lure, mixing friends and real estate also has its share of risk, though that may be avoided with proper planning and implementing an ownership agreement. Decisions about how to allocate time spent at the property and even determining how the property will be handled if someone dies, should be addressed before the purchase.
        An ownership agreement may also detail how expenses for maintaining the property and paying property taxes should be handled, as well as who will actually pay the monthly utility bills. Owners often choose to set up a separate bank account and require monthly or quarterly deposits. The agreement will also address whether disputes will be handled with a vote, an outside arbiter or end up in court.
        Not only do partnered owners need to make decisions on the use and upkeep of the property, but they also need to address the future of the property.
        ''The property will be sold eventually. Someone will die or have a change financial status,'' said Karen J. Radakovich, a lawyer with Frascona, Joiner, Goodman and Greenstein in Boulder, Colo., who structures three to four co-ownership agreements each month, noting that the agreement will lay out how a share will be passed along if someone dies. ''Does the property pass on to their children? What if you don't like their children?''
        Often owners give a right of first refusal, meaning that they have first dibs to buy the others out.
        Another issue that needs to be addressed is who will order, and pay for, property appraisals when it comes time to sell.
        Like the Liebermans and the Notricas, vacation home buyers may also consider setting up a limited liability company to buy their property. This serves to protect each individual owner's personal liability. For example, if one owner faces a tax lien, it would not affect the house. The downside to a limited liability company is that mortgage lenders often do not want to lend to that type of ownership structure, so buyers setting up such a company are more likely to buy the home with cash.
        Needless to say, there is also the inclination among friends to keep the arrangement casual. ''A common misconception is that the fewer owners the less likely there is to be a dispute, but the opposite tends to be true,'' said Andy Sirkin, a lawyer with Sirkin Paul Associates, a San Francisco law firm that specializes in co-ownership arrangements. ''They want to keep thing as light as possible, but I always say, 'Look, you can ignore this agreement, but it is here as a back up in case the informal system doesn't work.' ''
        But hammering out the details in a written agreement is only half the battle. Whether it will be a successful partnership probably comes down to old-fashioned compatibility. Both the Liebermans and the Notricas insist that their arrangement works because they traveled together extensively and know each others habits.
        ''Without naming names,'' Ms. Lieberman said, ''we have one planner in the group and the rest of us are happy with that.''
        HOME AWAY
      