
        C. Peter McColough, who sharply increased the size and prominence of the Xerox Corporation as its chief executive until his retirement in 1982, died on Dec. 13 in Rye Brook, N.Y. He was 86.
        His son, Andrew McColough, said the cause was cardiac arrest after a long illness.
        During a lengthy career, Mr. McColough was a fixture in American commerce. In addition to Xerox executive posts, he served on the boards of the New York Stock Exchange, Citibank, Union Carbide and Knight Ridder. He was also chairman of the United Way of America, and the treasurer of the Democratic National Committee from 1974 to 1976.
        He was a graduate of the Harvard Business School class of 1949, and like most of the men who attended the school in the aftermath of World War II, he had seen military duty, serving briefly in the British Navy in the final year of the war.
        Of that class of 700, nearly a third rose to the rank of president or chief executive of a company, according to David Callaghan, the author of a book on the class of '49. Fortune magazine called it ''the class the dollars fell on.''
        Mr. McColough was born in Halifax, Nova Scotia, the oldest son of the director of public works for the Parliament of Canada. He graduated from Dalhousie University in Halifax and then earned a law degree at Osgoode Hall Law School in Toronto before attending Harvard.
        He began his business career at the Lehigh Navigation Coal Sales Company and in 1954 joined the Haloid Company, as Xerox was then known, as general manager of its first reproduction service center in Chicago. At that time, the company was a little-known maker of industrial photocopying equipment.
        Five years later, the company introduced its first copier for offices, and its business took off. In 1959, Mr. McColough was promoted to general sales manager; a year later he was made vice president for sales. In 1961 he was elected to the board and in 1966, he became president.
        Mr. McColough was named chief executive in 1968 after the death of the company's longtime chief, Joseph C. Wilson. He became chairman in 1971, and held those positions until his retirement.
        During Mr. McColough's tenure at Xerox, he and Mr. Wilson adopted one of the first affirmative-action programs at a major corporation. In 1970, Mr. McColough also created Xerox's PARC research center, where many features of early personal computers were pioneered, though not produced by the company, which remained best known for its copying business.
        The company's revenue grew almost 10-fold to $8.5 billion in 1981, his last full year as chief executive, from $896 million in 1968, the year he attained the post. ''He led our company through a period of explosive growth and global expansion,'' Anne M. Mulcahy, the current chief executive, said in an e-mail memo to employees last week.
        Mr. McColough is survived by his wife of 53 years, Mary Virginia White McColough of Greenwich, Conn. They had five children, three of whom survive; they are Andrew McColough, of Fairfield, Conn.; Ian McColough, of New York City; and Virginia McColough Keeshan, also of Greenwich. Mr. McColough is also survived by his sister, Patricia McColough Wallace, of Halifax, Nova Scotia, and seven grandchildren.
        Correction:  December 20, 2006, Wednesday  An obituary on Monday about C. Peter McColough, a former chief executive and chairman of the Xerox Corporation, misstated the year in which his predecessor as chairman, Joseph C. Wilson, died. It was 1971, not 1968.
      