
        Cadet Hand, a marine biologist and authority on the crabs, snails and intertidal creatures of California's Central Coast, where he helped found a flourishing marine laboratory on Bodega Bay in the 1960s, died Nov. 29 at his home in Salmon Creek, Calif. He was 86.
        The cause was cancer, his family said.
        From 1961 to 1985, Dr. Hand was director of the Bodega Marine Laboratory, a center for the study of fish, invertebrates and coastal wildlife. Bodega Bay is about 65 miles north of San Francisco.
        In the '50s, Dr. Hand encountered the richness of the bay while teaching a summer biology course, initially holding classes in a crab fisherman's shack. Near the bay are mud flats, an estuary, and rocky and sandy shorelines that shelter a variety of organisms, including sea anemones, his particular interest.
        In the early '60s, plans for a research laboratory at Bodega Bay were threatened when adjoining land was selected as a site for a commercial nuclear power plant. Dr. Hand and colleagues at the University of California, Berkeley, pressed on. Ultimately they won out, and the nuclear plan was abandoned.
        Had the plant been built, Dr. Hand was prepared to study the thermal effects on marine life. The marine laboratory was built in 1966 and is now affiliated with the University of California, Davis.
        Earlier, Dr. Hand prepared an inventory of anemones found on the central California coast and concluded that one species, Nematostella, which is found in salt marshes, had unusual properties of reproduction. The species can propagate by sexual intercourse or asexually, by dividing to grow again.
        Daphne G. Fautin, a professor of ecology and evolutionary biology at the University of Kansas and a former student of Dr. Hand, said he had hit upon a ''model system for evolutionary biologists.'' As a result of work by Dr. Hand and a collaborator, Kevin R. Uhlinger, Nematostella has become a common species used in genetic research.
        Cadet Hammond Hand Jr. was born in Patchogue, on Long Island. He earned his doctorate in zoology from Berkeley in 1951.
        He taught at Mills College and did research at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography before returning to Berkeley as an assistant professor of zoology in 1953. He was named a professor of zoology there in 1962.
        Although he retired in 1985, Dr. Hand continued at the Bodega laboratory until 2003.
        From 1971 to 1992, he was a member of the safety and licensing board of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
        Dr. Hand is survived by his wife of 64 years, Winifred, and two sons, Cadet III and Gary, both of Sebastopol, Calif.
      