
        Car bombs exploded in crowded street markets in two predominantly Shiite neighborhoods of eastern Baghdad on Wednesday, killing at least 15 people and wounding at least 35, Iraqi and American officials said.
        The deadliest attack, in the working-class district of Kamaliya, killed at least 10 people and wounded 25, scattering bodies and reducing several cars and a row of market stalls to charred, smoldering husks, officials said.
        Several hours later, two car bombs exploded almost simultaneously on a busy street in the nearby neighborhood of Baghdad al Jedida, killing at least five people and wounding at least 10, an official at the Interior Ministry said. Car bombs are a common tactic of the Sunni Arab-led insurgency and are frequently detonated in places where Shiites congregate, seemingly with the intent of inflicting the most casualties possible, fomenting sectarian violence and further destabilizing the Shiite-dominated government.
        Dozens of other Iraqis were killed across Iraq on Wednesday, according to police and military reports shared with the news media.
        Two suicide car bombers detonated their vehicles at the gate of an Iraqi Army regiment responsible for protecting Iraq's oil pipelines, said Col. Abdul Sattar al-Jibouri, a police commander in Kirkuk. Seven Iraqi soldiers were killed and 14 others were wounded in that attack, he said.
        A group of gunmen killed nine Shiites, all from the same family, in the town of Hasna, a police official in the nearby city of Kut said. An adviser at the Transportation Ministry was kidnapped by gunmen near the ministry's headquarters in Baghdad, the Interior Ministry official said, and at least 21 bodies were recovered around Baghdad, all with gunshots to the head and signs of torture.
        Four mortar shells hit an apartment block popular with Palestinians in the eastern neighborhood of Baladiat, killing one Palestinian and wounding six, the Interior Ministry official said.
        Palestinians in Iraq, a population now concentrated in Baghdad, have been frequent victims of the Shiite militias this year. They carry the twin stigmas of being Sunni Arabs and of having enjoyed privileges under Saddam Hussein who, as part of his campaign to fashion himself into a Pan-Arab leader, was solicitous for their support. The housing complex that was attacked was created by the Baath Party for Palestinians who fled to Iraq following the creation of Israel in 1948.
      