
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Carter View of Israeli 'Apartheid' Stirs Furor'' (Arts pages, Dec. 14):
        Jimmy Carter may not have been a great president, but he is an admirable champion of justice and peace. He is also a man of enormous courage.
        Anyone who dares speak up for the Palestinians in America is certain to be vilified. Wise friends of Israel know that the one hope of its survival is an equitable resolution of the Palestinian issue.
        This requires withdrawal from all territories seized in 1967, reimbursing Palestinians for confiscated land and other wrongs, and the development of a viable Palestinian state.
        Two questions: How does the continuing expansion of Israeli settlements in the West Bank contribute to peace? Why do so many Americans have a blind spot when it comes to compassion for the suffering Palestinians?
        Much of the Middle East mess we're in today was rooted at first in America's inevitable support of Israel, the American media bias against the Palestinians, and our refusal to be an honest broker.
        Why can't we be pro-Israel and pro-Palestinian at the same time?
        (Rev.) Ralph Lord Roy  Southington, Conn., Dec. 14, 2006
        To the Editor:
        As a longtime student of this conflict, I'm appalled that a former American president would so distort reality.
        Where in Jimmy Carter's use of the term ''apartheid'' is a true reflection of the daunting situation that confronts Israel? The ''wall,'' for example, has probably saved thousands of innocent lives.
        The roadblocks and the security barrier are artifacts of war, not of racism.
        Israel is the only real democracy in the entire Middle East and is repeatedly threatened with extinction.
        Jimmy Carter has done the cause of peace, tolerance and reconciliation a great disservice.
        Elise Gates  Chicago, Dec. 14, 2006
        To the Editor:
        As Jews, we should not reflexively see criticism as denigration. It's rather easy in this case to distinguish between honest differences of opinion and vitriol.
        Jimmy Carter is clearly not the same as the president of Iran, and the fact that he questions Israeli policy does not make him an anti-Semite.
        A community does not become stronger by brooking no dissent; it only stagnates by doing so.
        We Jews must hear and engage in responsible dialogue on the Palestinian question, or we run the risk of further isolating ourselves.
        Jeremy Glazer  Miami Beach, Dec. 14, 2006
        To the Editor:
        The executive committee of the Board of Rabbis of Greater Phoenix met with Jimmy Carter for more than an hour, not to ''discuss'' his book, as you report he said, but to speak on behalf of the greater Phoenix Jewish community and share with him the very serious concerns we have regarding his book.
        Mr. Carter referred to our praying together. In essence, it was a closing invocation for peace in the world but was not intended and should not be construed as representing any agreement or conciliation by us with Mr. Carter's position.
        In fact, the opposite is true.
        His use of the word ''colonization'' to describe Israel's policies in the West Bank, without any consideration for the security concerns of the Israeli government, shows his bias on the issue.
        (Rabbi) Darren Kleinberg  Phoenix, Dec. 14, 2006
      