
        SHRINKING VIOLET
        By Cari Best.
        Illustrated by Giselle Potter.
        Unpaged. New York:
        Melanie Kroupa Books/
        Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
        $16. (Ages 4 to 8)
        STAND TALL,
        MOLLY LOU MELLON
        By Patty Lovell.
        Illustrated by David Catrow.
        Unpaged. New York:
        G. P. Putnam's Sons.
        $14.99. (Ages 4 to 8)
        THE CLASS ARTIST
        Written and illustrated
        by G. Brian Karas.
        Unpaged. New York:
        Greenwillow Books/
        HarperCollins Publishers.
        $15.95. (Ages 5 and up)
        A FINE, FINE SCHOOL
        By Sharon Creech.
        Illustrated by Harry Bliss.
        Unpaged. New York:
        Joanna Cotler Books/
        HarperCollins Publishers.
        $15.95. (Ages 4 to 8)
        POOR Violet. She's so shy that the slightest bit of attention makes her itch and scratch and twirl her hair. March in the parade on Carry-the-Flag Day? ''I can't do it,'' she tells the teacher in ''Shrinking Violet.'' ''Everyone will be watching me.'' A smirking classmate named Irwin only makes matters worse, taunting her at every turn. ''I will be watching your fat knees,'' he jeers.
        From the start you're rooting for Violet in Cari Best's story, which apparently springs from the author's own experience with childhood shyness and a school play about the solar system. Giselle Potter's quirky illustrations suit the tale. A sympathetic teacher hands out the parts -- some children are planets, others asteroids. Mindful of Violet's aversion to attention, the teacher appoints her Lady Space, a narrating role the girl can happily perform from offstage.
        Irksome Irwin, who says Violet has ''hairy arms'' and compares her to ''deadly sewer gas,'' gets his comeuppance the night of the show. As fiery Mars, he spins out of control, colliding with the other planets and generally wreaking havoc onstage. Violet, hidden in the wings, saves the day. Mustering a perfect Irwin imitation, she speaks his part, giving him time to scramble back to his place -- and giving him a taste of what it feels like to squirm in the spotlight.
        At the end of the show Lady Space gets a special round of applause. Irwin still pesters her, but now she's confident enough to brush it off. This Violet no longer feels like shrinking away.
        There are plenty of bullies on the prowl in these reassuring storybooks, but the pint-size protagonists always manage to triumph. The bully in Patty Lovell's ''Stand Tall, Molly Lou Mellon'' thinks he's found easy prey when he sees the new kid at school. Molly Lou Mellon is half his size, has big front teeth and speaks in ''a voice that sounded like a bullfrog being squeezed by a boa constrictor.'' David Catrow paints her as a big-eyed, freckle-faced pixie.
        ''Shrimpo!'' Ronald Durkin shouts at Molly Lou on her first day. But during gym the squirt runs under his legs with the football and scores a touchdown, astonishing the other players. Soon Ronald realizes he's met his match in this gutsy little girl, who is getting more popular by the day. And in a breathtaking about-face he decides to be her friend, leading to an ending that some readers may find a bit too neat (and sweet).
        In ''The Class Artist,'' by G. Brian Karas, another semi-autobiographical story, Fred has a different kind of nuisance on his hands. She's Frances, a busybody who says that he can't even draw a straight line.
        When the teacher gives the class a week to complete a major art project, Fred is so fired up he decides not just to draw an Indian tepee but to construct a real one, ''big enough to sit in, with paintings on the walls.''
        The problem is that Fred doesn't know how to make a tepee, and because he's vowed to keep his ambitious project a secret he won't ask for help. When Friday arrives, Fred still has nothing to show. As the teacher makes the rounds, Fred hastily cuts out a tiny tepee from a piece of white paper. ''Maybe no one will notice its small size,'' he thinks. Fat chance.
        In a riveting scene -- accompanied by the best illustration in the book -- the teacher holds up his paper scrap and asks, ''Is this the best you could do after an entire week?'' Humiliated, Fred swears off art and refuses to participate in circle time. But as he sits at a desk, glaring at his tepee, he starts to envision it at the center of a dramatic series of events. Before long he's got 10 large pictures taped together -- and one impressive art project. ''Wow,'' says Frances, having made the lightning leap from adversary to admirer. ''I wish I could draw like you.''
        But what if the principal himself needs an attitude adjustment? That's the question posed in ''A Fine, Fine School,'' by the Newbery Medal author Sharon Creech, with amusing illustrations by the New Yorker cartoonist Harry Bliss that will be best appreciated by children old enough to read to themselves.
        At Tillie's grade school the principal, Mr. Keene, is keyed up about how much the children are learning and decides the more school the better. First he announces that classes will be held on Saturdays. (A banner hung in the cafeteria asks, ''Why not study while you chew?'') Next he eliminates holidays, then summer vacation.
        Overtired and overworked, the kids are spending so much time at school that they lose touch with their families. Pushed to the limit, Tillie confronts the principal: the students may be mastering their lessons, she points out, but there are important things they're not learning -- like daydreaming and climbing trees. Mr. Keene looks around at children staggering through the halls with stacks of thick books -- and sees the light. By the next morning he has reinstated the regular school calendar. Now, that's something to cheer about.
        ''A Fine, Fine School '' might well have been conceived as a snappy rebuttal to the year-round schooling movement. It's definitely a fine, fine book.
        Children's Books Jane Margolies is a freelance writer in New York City.
      