
        Chris Hayward, an Emmy-winning writer for television whose work was once banned in Canada because of the painful inadequacies of one of its leading men -- the righteous, square-jawed and stupendously slow-witted Mountie Dudley Do-Right -- died on Nov. 20 at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif. Mr. Hayward, who was also a creator of ''The Munsters,'' was 81.
        The cause was cancer, said his wife, Linda Simmons Hayward. She said that news of Mr. Hayward's death had been made public only recently.
        Mr. Hayward was for many years a writer for Jay Ward Productions, creators of the subversive animated cartoons starring Rocky the flying squirrel and Bullwinkle J. Moose. Originally broadcast on ABC in 1959 as ''Rocky and His Friends,'' the program, renamed ''The Bullwinkle Show,'' moved to NBC in 1961; it returned to ABC from 1964 to 1973.
        A sophisticated cold war spoof (moose and squirrel are locked in endless battle with the perfidious Boris Badenov and Natasha Fatale), the show attracted an ardent cult following and has been blessed with eternal life in syndication. It comprised various segments, including ''Fractured Fairy Tales,'' narrated by Edward Everett Horton, and ''Peabody's Improbable History,'' starring a cerebral dog.
        Mr. Hayward worked on all the segments but was most closely associated with ''The Adventures of Dudley Do-Right,'' which followed the hapless royal Canadian Mountie in his ceaseless pursuit of Snidely Whiplash, a very naughty man.
        Because the Dudley Do-Right segments were deemed harmful to the national esteem, the Rocky and Bullwinkle shows were initially not broadcast in Canada.
        With Allan Burns, Mr. Hayward also conceived of ''The Munsters.'' The show, which chronicled the twisted fortunes of a family of ghouls, was broadcast on CBS from 1964 to 1966. At first, the two men received no credit for creating it. Only after the Writers Guild of America took up their case with the producer, Universal Studios, were they awarded credit and financial compensation.
        In 1968, Mr. Hayward and Mr. Burns won Emmy Awards for their work on ''He & She,'' a short-lived comedy on CBS starring Richard Benjamin and Paula Prentiss.
        Christopher Robert Hayward was born on June 19, 1925, in Bayonne, N.J. A self-taught singer and composer, he left high school before graduating to pursue a musical career in Los Angeles. But he suffered from stage fright and, encouraged by a night class in screenwriting, switched careers. During the 1950's, he worked for Mr. Ward on the animated series ''Crusader Rabbit.''
        In addition to his wife, Mr. Hayward is survived by a sister, Doreen Nagle of Fresno, Calif.; three children from a previous marriage, Laurel Hayward of London and Ojai, Calif.; Victoria O'Connor of London; and Tony Hayward of Ventura, Calif.; and two grandchildren.
        Among the other shows for which Mr. Hayward wrote are ''Get Smart'' and ''Barney Miller.'' But no subsequent job could match the peculiar charms of working for Jay Ward, a rogue cartoon producer famous for his economy. Jay Ward Productions was no Hanna-Barbera: Mr. Hayward often worked in a freezing basement, for little compensation beyond the joy of writing deliciously bad puns for the masses.
        ''The pay was low and the insecurity great,'' he told The Los Angeles Times in 1988. ''Jay felt the writers should pay him. His theory was 'Never show a profit or else you'll have to pay people.' ''
      