
        To the Editor:
        ''Religion for Captive Audiences, With Taxpayers Footing the Bill'' (''In God's Name'' series, front page, Dec. 10) reports that prisons are offering benefits to those who undergo intensive religious education.
        This blatant and offensive display of religious proliferation deserves intense scrutiny not only by the judicial system but also by any American who believes that all people have the right to equal benefits, regardless of religious beliefs.
        Religious affiliation is no basis for increased government-financed benefits.
        Ben Wiessmann  Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.  Dec. 10, 2006
        To the Editor:
        I am a chaplain in a Midwestern women's prison. I am very much opposed to proselytizing in my private life and am legally required to curtail it in my professional life.
        Yet I am in favor of religious rehabilitative programming in prisons. Those opposed to faith-based programs fail to realize the value of the act of visiting, of coming into a facility to offer something, of showing love and making a connection.
        I would challenge these people not simply to tear down the few programs left in prisons, faulty though they may be, but to enter prisons themselves and build alternative programs with the love and commitment their evangelical brothers and sisters are showing.
        Jessica Van Denend  Fond du Lac, Wis., Dec. 10, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Your article raised several questions:
        If alternative treatment plans are so effective in rehabilitating inmates and reducing recidivism, why are they not part of the regular program at prisons across the country? Why are prisons outsourcing one of their primary responsibilities?
        If running these programs is so important to the religious groups that run them, why can't these groups raise the money to finance these programs from their own supporters? Why do they need to use taxpayers' money?
        Is there any proof that inmates who get religion behind bars, whether it is fundamentalist Islam or evangelical Christianity, are less likely to commit crimes once they are released?
        Peter S. Green  New York, Dec. 10, 2006
        To the Editor:
        The InnerChange Freedom Initiative in the Iowa prison system serves to underscore what for the last decade has become a growing problem of using taxpayers to finance the proselytizing of inmates.
        Whatever the prison program's merits, the government should not be involved in promoting any particular faith. Religion already has its proper place in correctional facilities.
        To grant preferential treatment to some inmates solely because they agree to engage in religious indoctrination, underwritten with taxpayer dollars, is bad public policy and, as the courts have ruled, unconstitutional.
        Jeffrey Sinensky  General Counsel  American Jewish Committee  New York, Dec. 10, 2006
        To the Editor:
        As a member of the American Civil Liberties Union and a Christian who supports the separation of church and state, I normally do not find much agreement with evangelicals. But a good friend who spent many years in prison received no education, training, alcoholism treatment or other preparation when he was unceremoniously dumped, homeless and penniless, back into the society he left in the 1970s.
        The 700,000 people a year released from prisons and jails, sometimes after decades of imprisonment and long-term solitary confinement, receive by default government-sponsored training in the violence and antisocial behavior necessary to stay alive in prison.
        If we don't want evangelicals to be the ones trying to change this situation, somebody else had better step up to the plate!
        Claudia Hutchinson  Alexandria, Ohio, Dec. 11, 2006
      