
        The church bells here do not toll with a deep, bellowing tone. Instead, every hour they squeeze out a tinny, electronic sound from the top of a small Baptist church on Main Street.
        Now an outcry over the chimes has grown much louder than the anemic sounds coming from the bells themselves, and the bells are part of a clamorous stew of opinions about church and state, and tolerance.
        From the top of Jewett City Baptist Church, the bells toll every hour, followed by a bit of music, sometimes ''My Country 'Tis of Thee,'' other times ''Onward, Christian Soldiers.'' William Russell, a small-business owner in Norwich and a frequent visitor to Jewett City, became fed up with hearing the sounds.
        Mr. Russell, an atheist, said he found the music offensive, tantamount to proselytizing. So he called the state's chapter of the Atheists of America organization, which in turn complained to the police, asking that the church tone down the volume. Should that fail, they said, they may file a lawsuit.
        ''Why should I be forced to listen to someone else's religious music when I'm out minding my own business?'' Mr. Russell complained.
        It turned out that he was actually fighting City Hall. Although the noise comes from the church's belfry, it is not the parish that owns the bells but the municipal government, which has operated the sound system for the last decade as a way to ''brighten up'' the center of town.
        Mr. Russell was not brightened.
        ''It irritated the heck out of me,'' he said in a telephone interview.
        While Mr. Russell lives a few miles away in Norwich, he visits Jewett City at least twice a month to help an elderly relative with errands, usually stopping at the bank across the street from the church.
        Jewett City, a borough tucked in the eastern part of the state inside the Town of Griswold, is a place where farms have given way to subdivisions, and most of the 3,200 residents find jobs at the nearby submarine base or at one of the booming Indian casinos.
        The unexpected criticism from an outsider was hardly welcomed by residents, most of whom have lived here their entire lives.
        Dozens attended a meeting on Monday morning at the town hall, and not one had a bad thing to say about the bells.
        ''Don't people have better things to worry about than this?'' asked Polly Clark, 69, who is not one to shy away from making her complaints known. They usually center around the deteriorating roads and things like that.
        Still, she did not appreciate this man sweeping into town and raising a ruckus.
        Her husband, Bill, 73, was of like mind. ''This place has been nice,'' he said, over a lunch of spaghetti and meatballs at Charlene's Diner. ''The bells are nice, the people are nice. Just leave it alone and be nice.''
        Nobody in Jewett City seems to want to silence the bells. Cynthia Kata, who as the borough's warden is the chief political leader, says she will take action only if the atheists file suit. And even if a lawsuit is filed, local business owners have already concocted their own alternative, offering to buy the sound system for a dollar.
        A lonely wreath adorns the front of the church in this holiday season, along with a small sign advertising the singing of Christmas hymns later this month. And the church, with fewer than two dozen regular parishioners, is trying to stay out of this battle, though the sounds emanating from its belfry might make that hard to do.
        Ms. Kata found little merit in Mr. Russell's position. ''It's not like I have a baby Jesus in the front yard,'' Ms. Kata said.
        Besides, she said, what better proof of the borough's ecumenical ways than the candelabras on display in honor of Hanukkah and Kwanzaa near the Christmas tree in the town hall?
        (It is safe to assume that no large contingents of local residents celebrate either of those holidays.)
        ''And we're not the only town in America with a church that plays music,'' she said.
        Initially, the plan entailed putting the bells atop the town hall, but the church was chosen because it is taller and therefore better positioned to spread the sound.
        The computerized sound system has more than 400 songs available -- including ''Ave Maria,'' ''O Little Town of Bethlehem,'' and ''Joy to the World'' for Christmastime. But those songs have not even been played in the last couple of years because nobody has climbed up to the belfry to change the music.
        In a letter to the editor in the local newspaper, one man recommended sounding a special alert when Mr. Russell came to town in order to quiet the bells. Some have suggested he simply avoid Route 12 at the center of town.
        Others have said he could avoid the noise entirely if he did not come a few minutes before the hour and if he kept his visits brief.
        But while the bells are supposed to chime at each quarter hour from 8 a.m. daily, they seem to be perpetually behind schedule.
        For now, the town plans to measure the decibel level of the bells next week and vows to lower the volume if any noise ordinances are being violated.
        Dennis Paul Hines, president of the Connecticut chapter of American Atheists, who filed the initial complaint with the town, said ''any reasonable person would think that this is not separating church and state.''
        He said the local government had taken an action that was for the benefit of the church. ''It's releasing a culture of religious exceptionalism, period,'' he said.
        Mr. Hines said that he would ask leaders of the national organization to consider taking legal action, or petition the American Civil Liberties Union to do the same.
        Moments before the bells rang out and music played on Wednesday afternoon, Bonnie Baron had a few succinct words for those bothered by the bells:
        ''Go back to where you came from and shut up.''
        JEWETT CITY JOURNAL
      