
        The administration of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg is moving to restrict the powers of the comptroller and borough presidents to approve deals to sell products on city properties, according to proposed rules being drafted by the city.
        The change is part of a series of measures that would also include eliminating background checks of vendors in certain circumstances until after they were awarded their contracts.
        The oversight that the comptroller and the borough presidents have over concessions is one of the last vestiges of their former powers under the Board of Estimate, which approved city contracts until its elimination in 1990.
        At stake are billions of dollars in contracts for the right to sell products on city properties. In recent years, such reviews have highlighted problems with the city's concession to sell Snapple beverages in the schools, and found that a company seeking to operate a water park on Randalls Island was at one point bankrupt.
        Administration officials say that the proposed changes, which include several other measures, are meant to bring greater efficiency and transparency to an area that has been marred by corruption and inefficiency in the past.
        But elected officials and some policy experts said that the changes would do just the opposite: reduce transparency and open the door to an inevitable tide of corruption.
        ''It's a bad idea in the long run,'' said Richard D. Emery, a Manhattan lawyer who brought the lawsuit that helped undo the Board of Estimate.
        ''It's completely understandable what Mayor Bloomberg is doing, because he is not corrupt,'' Mr. Emery added. ''He is trying to establish practices that are consist with efficient and honest government, but wait until the next mayor, or the mayor after that, and these practices will come back to bite us in the rear.''
        Administration officials emphasized that the rules, under consideration by the city's Franchise and Concession Review Committee, were a work in progress and were being released for public review. But the changes ultimately rest in the hands of Mr. Bloomberg, who controls four of the six votes on the committee. The comptroller, William C. Thompson Jr., controls one vote, and the borough presidents collectively control the last.
        The committee rules have not been changed in more than a decade, said Edward Skyler, the deputy mayor who oversees the committee. The changes, he added, would make the process ''more transparent to the public, more flexible to accommodate innovative agreements with the private sector and bring accepted best practices to the process by making the rules consistent with current procurement regulations.''
        Many of the changes the administration is seeking are drawing little if any opposition. One would allow a vendor whose bid is not accepted to appeal to the Mayor's Office of Contract Services rather than just to an agency commissioner, while another would allow agencies to tell those competing for a contract the relative importance of the selection criteria.
        But other proposed changes have stirred critics who say they would allow the administration to almost unilaterally negotiate deals with a single vendor with far less public scrutiny.
        Under the current rules, if the city wants to avoid competitive bids or proposals, it must first get authorization from the concession review committee to negotiate with only one entity and then seek approval of the deal by the committee at a later meeting.
        The new rules would collapse this process by eliminating the requirement for prior authorization, and allowing the administration to present a deal for approval with notice of as little as 10 days.
        In addition, in certain circumstances the city could waive a requirement that vendors complete background disclosure forms for its Vendex computerized contract database before their contracts were certified by the comptroller, among the final steps before a contract goes into force.
        Administration officials say that in the age of the Internet, 10 days or so is enough to gather information on a proposed deal, and that the comptroller and borough presidents will still be notified of the negotiations 30 days before that. And they say that the city's procurement rules already allow officials to waive or delay the disclosure process in certain types of contracts under circumstances like time pressures, although it is rarely done.
        But critics say that the changes would make it even easier, for instance, for the city to enter into exclusive arrangements like the much-criticized deal with Snapple, in which the company was given the sole right to sell teas, fruit juices, water and chocolate drinks through vending machines and concessions on city property. Because of poor sales, the contract has brought the city much less money than originally projected.
        According to Mr. Thompson, who has been critical of that deal, the changes sought by the administration would give him and the borough presidents a much smaller window to catch things like potential mob ties, bankruptcies or other financial problems.
        A review by Mr. Thompson's office of a deal with the Aquatic Development Group to build a water theme park on Randalls Island turned up a past bankruptcy filing. That deal went forward anyway, Mr. Thompson said, but it is not moving along smoothly because of problems with the financing.
        ''Less review, less openness, less transparency just doesn't make any sense,'' Mr. Thompson said, ''and both of these changes will have that effect.''
        Scott M. Stringer, the Manhattan borough president, said he, too, was concerned about losing time to examine the deals and press the administration on concerns like jobs for his constituents.
        ''What I have found helpful as a member with a one-fifth vote was that I was able to have an impact,'' Mr. Stringer said. ''I understand the administration's desire to move forward in a timely manner, but we're creating a scenario where there's a rush to judgment and we don't end up with the best product.''
      