
        New York City and state officials agreed yesterday to distribute millions of dollars in retroactive benefits to settle a class-action lawsuit by disabled New Yorkers who improperly lost their food stamps when they were transferred from welfare to the federal disability rolls.
        The settlement still needs the approval of the United States Department of Agriculture, which ultimately pays for the benefits.
        Roughly 100,000 New Yorkers could be eligible to receive food stamp coupons to replace benefits denied to them erroneously for any period since 1999. Bill Lienhard, a lawyer for Urban Justice Center, which brought the lawsuit, Harris v. Eggleston, estimated that payouts for benefits due would amount to at least $4.3 million.
        ''This is really a breakthrough for a lot of poor and disabled people,'' Mr. Lienhard said. ''When you consider the fact that people on disability payments are living on $600 a month, and that they may be eligible for food stamps for $100 a month, this is a really big deal.''
        The lawsuit, which was filed in 2002, has it roots in federal welfare policy changes that were approved in 1996. With new time limits on welfare benefits, the city and state acted to move the most disabled and least able to work from welfare to the federal Social Security disability program, which has no time limit. Many of those transferred were automatically cut off from food stamps, which is a supplemental program just for food. Federal law explicitly allowed people to receive both benefits.
        City and state officials acknowledged the problem for years after it emerged, but said it was caused by computer glitches that they were working to fix. When the Urban Justice Center sued in 2002, all parties readily agreed that automatic cutoffs should be prevented. The state and city say that they largely solved the problem soon after.
        But since 2002, parties to the lawsuit have struggled on how to efficiently restore benefits to those who lost them. The city and state have resisted having to calculate benefits owed to every individual who might have been affected as needlessly expensive and time-consuming and even burdensome to the people it was supposed to be helping.
        To simplify the process, all parties ''agreed on a plan to restore food stamps using standard amounts for certain categories of class members and abbreviated application procedures,'' according to a letter describing the settlement. The letter was sent yesterday to the judge presiding over the case and was agreed to by the city, state and plaintiffs.
        Mr. Lienhard said he expected the Agriculture Department to approve the proposal, though he said the process was likely to take several months. Michael Hayes, a spokesman for the State Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance, said, ''Once we hear back from U.S.D.A., we can begin the process of distributing retroactive benefits.''
        City officials would say only that the proposal would not be final until Washington weighed in.
        Reached yesterday, Barbara Harris, the named plaintiff of the suit, said the imminent settlement felt good. Ms. Harris said she is still owed $93 from when she was disconnected from her benefits for four months in 2001.
      