
        In last month's election, there were two candidates whose successful races for the Assembly were not widely noticed, at least not by most New Yorkers. But their victories nonetheless seemed to rivet some journalists overseas.
        In a few weeks, one of them, Ellen Young, will be sworn in as an assemblywoman representing Flushing, Queens, making her the first Asian-American woman to be elected to the State Legislature. In Brooklyn, Alec Brook-Krasny was elected to represent a district anchored in Brighton Beach, making him the first Soviet-born member of the Assembly.
        These incoming Assembly members, both of them Democrats, say they have been the subjects of much foreign media attention. Ms. Young said she had been called by newspapers and broadcast stations in China, Taiwan and even Korea. Mr. Brook-Krasny said he been interviewed by several media organizations in Russia.
        Ms. Young, 54, who was born in Taiwan, said the distinction made her election ''something that a lot of people are interested in not only here, but in Asia.''
        Mr. Brook-Krasny, 48, won a fiercely competitive race against another Soviet-born candidate; some of the press coverage centered on allegations that Mr. Brook-Krasny was loyal to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, while his opponent was accused of having ties to the K.G.B., the old Soviet spy agency, links that both candidates denied.
        ''I'm the first candidate elected here who was born on the other side of the Iron Curtain,'' Mr. Brook-Krasny said. ''And many people back in Russia find that fascinating.''
        Political scientists suggest that the elections of Ms. Brook-Krasny and Ms. Young are part of the continuing trend toward more diverse representation, not only in Albany but also in the 51-member New York City Council.
        ''This is part of a trend that has been going on for some time,'' said John H. Mollenkopf, the director of the Center for Urban Research at the City University Graduate Center. ''And there will be more of this happening as time goes by.''
        If voters and New York City residents paid little attention to the election of these two Assembly members, it might well be that they have become accustomed to ethnic firsts. In the last decade or so, the city has seen the election of its first Asian-American Council member, John C. Liu, who is also from Flushing. During that time, Queens elected its first Hispanic assemblyman and councilman, Manhattan elected its first Dominican assemblyman and councilman, and Brooklyn elected its first Jamaican-born councilwoman.
        The new Assembly members won two of the most hotly contested Democratic primaries in New York City, and won by the narrowest of victories. Mr. Brook-Krasny won his primary by about 140 votes, and Ms. Young won a three-candidate primary by fewer than 100 votes.
        Ms. Young was an aide to Councilman Liu and has become known in Flushing as an advocate for immigrant issues, having organized programs to help immigrants fill out Census forms. She also has served as the president of the Chinese American Voters Association.
        Her election reflects a political coming of age for Asian-Americans in Queens. After Mr. Liu's election to the City Council in 2001, Jimmy Meng became the Assembly's first Chinese-American member in 2004. But Mr. Meng decided not to run for re-election this year, citing health concerns.
        Ms. Young said that since her election, she had been approached by a number of Asian-American women in her district who say they consider her election an important milestone. Slightly more than 50 percent of the 22nd Assembly District's residents are Asian-American.
        ''There are quite a number of Asian woman who say that I have inspired them,'' Ms. Young said. ''And they are looking to me as something of a role model. I think it's nice. But I tell them that I didn't run because I'm an Asian-American, but that I have been dedicated to my community for 28 years.''
        Similarly, Mr. Brook-Krasny's election represents the rise of Russian-born politicians in southern Brooklyn since the fall of Communism transformed the ethnicity of the area. The 43rd Assembly District is home to a large number of Russian-speaking immigrants.
        ''I think that my election opened the door in this community,'' Mr. Brook-Krasny said. ''And we have many more Russian speakers, especially young ones, who are interested in politics.''
      