
        Street-level surveillance cameras have proliferated in Manhattan since 9/11, with nearly 4,200 cameras found below 14th Street, more than five times the number counted in 1998, the New York Civil Liberties Union said yesterday.
        The figures were part of a report by the civil liberties group that said the surge in cameras had outpaced a thorough discussion of the way they are being used and regulated. The group has been involved in a court battle with the police over the use and distribution of videotapes made at demonstrations.
        The report described ''a massive video surveillance infrastructure'' and warned that it was being developed with ''virtually no oversight or accountability.'' The City Council is considering requiring video cameras at nightclubs that have cabaret licenses. And last month, the first two city buses with surveillance cameras were on the streets as part of a $5.2 million project that New York City Transit said would ''offer a visible crime deterrent.''
        But the report disputed the notion that such surveillance reduces crime or terrorism. ''While video images may assist in criminal investigations after the fact,'' it said, ''there is a dearth of evidence that supports the contention that video surveillance cameras actually prevent or deter crime.''
        As for terrorism, the report said that cameras in London's subway system did not stop terrorists from placing the bombs that ripped through three trains in July 2005. Another bomb was placed that same day on a double-decker bus. In all, more than 50 people were killed.
        While the civil liberties group described a surge in the number of cameras since its last tally, in 1998, the latest report did not say exactly how many there are. The civil liberties group found that it could not count the cameras in all of Manhattan, as it had done eight years ago, because there are now so many cameras that it did not have the personnel to do so, said Donna Lieberman, the group's executive director.
        So the group concentrated on four areas. Even then, its totals did not include large numbers of cameras, including roughly 3,100 of them in 15 public housing buildings.
        Going area by area, the biggest increase in cameras was in Greenwich Village and SoHo, where the report's count was 2,227, compared with 142 in 1998.
        In the East Village, the Lower East Side and Chinatown, the report found 643, compared with 181 eight years ago. In the financial district, there were 1,306, up from 446 in 1998.
        The report also found 292 cameras in central Harlem, with more than 80 on West 125th Street. The group did not count the cameras there in 1998.
        ''Cameras are popping up on building facades, storefronts and light poles,'' Ms. Lieberman said.
        Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly mentioned cameras after an antiterrorism conference yesterday. He called them ''a valuable tool in protecting the city,'' adding that ''we're certainly committed to cameras, more cameras.''
        He said the importance of cameras had been reinforced by a drill conducted last year, when New York police officers tried to approximate the distance that the London bombers had traveled on their deadly mission. The New York officers drove to Poughkeepsie, N.Y., from Albany, then took a train to Grand Central Terminal.
        Mr. Kelly said the drill was ''basically an attempt to see what defensive measures were in place; what would perhaps capture the movements of a terrorist group, a terrorist cell.'' He said police officials wondered ''if they would be affected by the presence of law enforcement in any way.''
        Paul J. Browne, the Police Department's chief spokesman, said in a statement responding to the report that cameras were ''a highly effective crime-fighting tool, responsible for a 35 percent reduction in crime in public housing soon after their installation in public spaces there.''
      