
        Was it a whodunit or a ruse from the start?
        At the center of a legal dispute over Brooke Astor's care and finances were allegations that she had been forced to sleep on a urine-soiled couch in the television room of her Park Avenue duplex during the winter because her bedroom was too cold.
        But when lawyers for the parties in the case first inspected the apartment in early August, they found that the couch and just about everything else in Mrs. Astor's home appeared to be well kept and clean. They even smelled the couch to make sure that Mrs. Astor's two dogs, Boysie and Girlsie, had not soiled it.
        Had someone scrubbed the couch, thus destroying evidence, or had it never been sodden in the first place?
        In early October, Justice John E. H. Stackhouse of State Supreme Court in Manhattan decided to tackle the couch quandary. He dispatched J. P. Morgan Chase, the investment bank he had named as one of Mrs. Astor's guardians, to find out whether any heavy-duty cleaning or repairs had taken place at the Astor abode to erase any signs of supposedly shoddy conditions.
        Five days later came the official seven-page report, and the answer: who knows?
        The bank focused on two time periods in its quest for the truth. One was from July 5, when an affidavit concerning the couch was given by one of Mrs. Astor's nurses, to 5 p.m. on July 24. That was the date that J. P. Morgan Chase assumed control of the apartment as part of the guardianship case brought by her grandson Philip Marshall, who had accused his father, Anthony D. Marshall, 82, of neglecting the care of Mrs. Astor, 104. The other period was from 5:30 p.m. on July 24 to Oct. 11, when the bank completed its report. The document, for a while considered confidential, was provided to The New York Times by one of the parties in the case.
        From the get-go, the lawyers who handled the investigation encountered deniability. ''The household staff has informed us that prior to the bank taking control of the apartment, no extraordinary repairs, alterations or cleanings of the apartment took place,'' the report said.
        Two members of Mrs. Astor's household staff, whom the lawyers interviewed, ''denied engaging in any such activities,'' the bank's lawyers, Les Fagen and Daniel G. Fish, wrote in the report.
        Later, one staff member, Mily DeGernier, Mrs. Astor's head housekeeper, told the lawyers that before she went on sick leave from July 17 through July 23, she had cleaned the brightly colored chintz couch daily with rubbing alcohol, the report said. Still, the report reaches no overall conclusion about a potential upholstery cover-up.
        Anthony Marshall's lawyer, Kenneth E. Warner, said yesterday: ''After the inspection, the question became, 'What happened here?' There were two possibilities: the conditions never existed or they were corrected. If the conditions existed, one would assume that lawyers would document them before changing them.''
        Referring to the bank's report, Mr. Warner said the fact that ''all these people'' said ''they have no idea how these conditions vanished makes it clear to me that they never existed.'' Last week, Justice Stackhouse said the elder abuse claims had not been substantiated.
        Philip Marshall's lawyer, Ira Salzman, said in a statement that the report was unclear about what constitutes ''extraordinary'' cleaning. He said that during the August visit to the apartment, he noticed that the couch had some stains and a ''very faint'' odor that he could not identify.
        ''Thereafter, I advised counsel for Mr. Anthony Marshall and the court that I believed that the couch had been cleaned,'' he said.
        Urine-soaked or not, the couch is no longer used by Mrs. Astor. Since the end of July, she has been living at her Westchester estate.
      