
        A day after rescuers found the body of one of three climbers missing near the summit of Mount Hood, the authorities on Monday identified him and said an arm injury had probably left him stranded.
        The body of the climber, Kelly James, 48, an architect from Dallas, was recovered from the mountain on Monday afternoon, said Sheriff Joe Wampler of Hood River County.
        ''One of the questions that we've all been asking ourselves is why was Kelly James left back up on the mountain,'' Sheriff Wampler said shortly after rescuers with the Air Force Reserve and a local mountain rescue group helped bring the body down by helicopter. ''It appears that one of the reasons was probably because there was an obvious arm injury on him.''
        He would not elaborate when asked if the arm was broken.
        Family members of Mr. James had said earlier that the authorities had found a ring on the body engraved with his initials and other items that convinced the family that it was he who had died.
        Frank James, a brother, said the family had ''found peace'' with the death. ''Kelly always told us that he felt closest to God when he was on the mountain,'' he said. ''That is what drove him to climb.''
        Rescuers continued to search for the other missing climbers on Monday, and the authorities suggested that the men might have fallen or had other trouble on a treacherous section on the mountain's north side.
        The last known contact with the climbers was on Dec. 10, two days after they had reached the 11,239-foot summit. That day, Kelly James told his wife in a cellphone call that he was taking shelter in a snow cave and that his fellow climbers had left for help.
        Sheriff Wampler, who is overseeing the rescue effort, said Monday that after Mr. James and the other climbers, Brian Hall, 38, of Dallas, and Jerry Cooke, 36, of Brooklyn, reached the summit, they could have encountered foul weather and decided to build a cave. Mr. James's arm injury also might have complicated their plans to descend.
        The cave, about 300 feet from the summit on the south side, is where rescuers found Mr. James's body. The sheriff said the cave was just large enough for three people. Rescuers found a cellphone there that the sheriff said was ''full of water.''
        The sheriff said the two other climbers might have left to find help for Mr. James as early as Dec. 9. Before rescuers found the cave, they found another one, more hastily built and on the north side; they believed the two climbers might have made it after leaving Mr. James.
        Three sets of footprints lead from the summit to where Mr. James was found. Only two sets lead to the second cave. There are no obvious tracks leading from the second cave, the sheriff said.
        Rescuers spotted the second cave because ropes had been anchored near it in a Y shape. The ropes were first said to be a signal marking the climbers' location, but Sheriff Wampler said Monday that they were more likely an anchor point, perhaps to begin a descent in a particularly steep section known as the gullies.
        ''We assume that was the last known point of the two climbers that were descending,'' he said.
        Elevation on the northeast side can drop about 3,000 feet quickly, and as much as 10 feet of snow has gathered in places recently, the sheriff said. Rescue efforts have been complicated by the risk of avalanches.
        The gullies area, next to Eliot Glacier, still brittle in places from summer warmth, has holes as deep as 80 feet, said Capt. Chris Bernard of the Oregon National Guard, which is helping coordinate an aerial search.
        Sheriff Wampler said 13 climbers had died near the gullies in the last 40 years.
        He said it was possible the two missing climbers had dug a cave elsewhere on the mountain, their tracks hidden by new snow. He added that weather would probably allow rescue work to continue until Wednesday. After that, he said, ''we're going to be limited in what we can do.''
      