
        ALTHOUGH divorce records are sealed in New York, the final stage of divorce, the property transfer, is memorialized in public records for all time.
        Property transfer records show that Sharon Elghanayan, who rose to public attention when she was the date of Gov. Jon S. Corzine of New Jersey at his inaugural ball last January, received the title to her apartment at 944 Fifth Avenue at East 75th Street, a building with sweeping full-floor apartments, from her former husband, K. Thomas Elghanayan. The transfer was dated Dec. 4.
        Mr. Elghanayan is the president of the Rockrose Development Corporation, a large family-owned residential real estate developer and manager in New York. The company is now developing seven buildings on a 22-acre waterfront site across the East River in Long Island City; the first building in the project, a 32-story glass tower, is now renting.
        With the New Jersey press corps still abuzz about Mr. Corzine's earlier relationship, with Carla Katz, the president of a Communications Workers of America Local 1034, and the $470,000 mortgage he paid off on her behalf, Ms. Elghanayan has attracted little public attention since the inauguration. She did not respond to several messages left at her office.
        At the time of the inauguration, she was described as a psychotherapist and an avid kickboxer, who returned to school to get a master's degree after raising two children. She was also described in several media accounts as already being divorced.
        Ms. Elghanayan, who is 61, is affiliated with the Institute of Contemporary Psychology, a nonprofit mental health treatment and training clinic in Manhattan. Anthony Coley, a press spokesman for the 59-year-old Mr. Corzine, confirmed that Ms. Elghanayan and the governor continue to see each other.
        Last year, Mr. Elghanayan found a new place of his own. He spent $12.3 million (plus another $450,000 for a storage room) to buy a penthouse apartment at 19 East 72nd Street, the last building designed by Rosario Candela, on the corner of Madison Avenue. The apartment had been owned by the late John F. Cullman 3rd, the longtime chairman of the Philip Morris Companies. Mr. Elghanayan declined to comment.
        BIG DEAL
      