
        The Nets' Jason Collins is a starter who often comes off like a bench warmer. He is the whipping boy of the fans, who tend to notice the layups he misses and the fouls he commits more than the charges he draws and the screens he sets.
        So when he put in a layup, flexed his muscles and grunted early in the fourth quarter during Wednesday night's game-breaking run against the Cleveland Cavaliers, it was a moment for him to savor. And the fact that he actually heard cheers could only have meant good things for the Nets.
        Struggling to find a rhythm this season, the Nets, behind the energy of role players like Collins and 38 points from Vince Carter, beat a winning team for only the second time this season. They knocked off the Cavaliers, 113-111, at Continental Arena. The Nets (11-14) have won two consecutive games.
        ''We don't really think of Twin as a scorer,'' Carter said, referring to Collins. ''But at the same time, what he brings to the table, the intangibles, probably go unappreciated around the world. He does a lot of things that go unnoticed and will never show up in the papers, 'SportsCenter,' anything.''
        Carter has made quite a few highlight reels in his career, and he cut new footage Wednesday night with more than his scoring. He showed excellent floor awareness and found open teammates when the defense surrounded him.
        Carter finished with six assists, although his points were just as important to his psyche because they got him out of a funk. He averaged 11.7 points and shot 25 percent from the field in the past three games.
        Nets Coach Lawrence Frank said of Carter, ''His intent right from the beginning, great balance between post-ups, spot-ups, drives, passing -- he was great.''
        Carter was one of several Nets to guard the Cavaliers' LeBron James, who scored 37 points and helped scare the Nets toward the end by helping his team cut a 7-point deficit to 3 in a span of about 10 seconds. But James threw a pass that was intercepted by Carter with just over five seconds to play, and Carter secured the victory with a free throw.
        The Nets put themselves in control with a run spanning the third and fourth quarters, and it was accomplished mostly on the strength of their supporting cast and Carter's game management.
        After Carter hit a jump shot with just under two minutes to play in the third quarter, the reserve forward Bostjan Nachbar scored the Nets' final two baskets of the quarter on a dunk and a 3-pointer.
        The Nets then opened the fourth quarter with a fast-break layup from the rookie swingman Hassan Adams.
        Collins, who scored 7 of his season-high 9 points in the fourth quarter, then took a pass from Carter, rolled to the basket and put in a layup while receiving a flagrant foul from Cleveland's Drew Gooden. After the basket, Collins lay on the ground, pumped his fists and roared.
        ''When was the last time you remember someone getting a flagrant foul and actually making the shot?'' Collins said. ''It was just a good strong take, and definitely a good play.''
        Collins's basket was followed by back-to-back 3-pointers from point guard Marcus Williams and Carter to cap an 18-5 run that put the Nets ahead by 89-73 with about 10 minutes to play. The Cavaliers answered with 11 points in a row, but the Nets never relinquished their lead.
        Collins's grunt work, rarely noticeable to fans, was on clear display Wednesday night. Collins drew a couple of key fouls on James in the third quarter, one a charge and the other when James was trying to fight through a pick by Collins. James entered the fourth quarter with four fouls.
        ''Taking charges isn't as exciting as getting a blocked shot, but it can be just as, even more, effective, because you're getting a foul on LeBron,'' Collins said.
        He added: ''Not everyone can appreciate all the things I do to help my team win. Since I've been here, we've been very successful with me doing small things to help the team win.''
        REBOUNDS
        The Nets' move to Brooklyn is all but a formality after a state oversight board voted Wednesday to approve the Atlantic Yards project, which will be the sight of the team's new arena. The Nets, who have been in New Jersey since 1977, are hoping to move by 2009.
        PRO BASKETBALL
      