
        Giants left tackle Bob Whitfield was thrust without warning right back where he had spent most of his 15-year N.F.L. career -- protecting the quarterback's blind side, fending off defensive ends, pushing open holes for someone else's glory.
        It took only a couple of quarters of doing that again for Whitfield to consider retirement.
        Whitfield, 35, had grown comfortable in his role as a backup player and a locker-room comic for the Giants. He was still 6 feet 5 inches, 310 pounds, but with every game on the bench, his usefulness was less physical, more mental. On the Giants' roster, only the punter is older, and accolades from coaches and teammates typically include euphemisms for age -- experience and presence, intelligence and guile.
        Teammates have long laughed at his jokes, shaken their heads at his audacity, and probably hoped he would not be needed to play.
        But then starting left tackle Luke Petitgout broke his leg on Nov. 12 against the Chicago Bears. Whitfield was no longer comfortable, and he was no longer funny.
        He was beaten. He was tired. He was embarrassed.
        ''I don't think I was in the right frame of mind that I needed to be in to play a football game,'' Whitfield said Wednesday. ''You get complacent when you know you've got two good tackles playing ahead of you, and they were pulling their weight the whole year.''
        Whitfield started 167 games for the Atlanta Falcons from 1992 to 2003. Until Petitgout was hurt, he had started only three games with Jacksonville and the Giants since. Filling in seemed easier than starting. Whitfield even confessed to watching late-night movies in the hotel the night before the Bears game.
        By his admission, he played horribly. He allowed a pair of sacks and was called for holding during a 38-20 loss.
        Whitfield was jolted by his embarrassing play and the internal confrontation with the end of his career. He is spending longer hours in the weight room and watching video -- game tape, not movies.
        He has improved each week. He is having fun again, feeling truly important, and is even talking about playing a couple more years.
        The youthful resurrection is timely for the Giants, whose playoff hopes rest, in large part, on Whitfield's broad shoulders.
        ''I love being in the action,'' he said. ''I love being in the juice. I was chillin' before and having a real good time. But when you go out there in the meat and potatoes of it all, I like the fact that you earn your salt. You earn the respect. You earn the looks and the nods and the things that they say about you. You earn that good stuff. I like being in it, because I like the pressure of being in it.''
        The biggest test will come Sunday, when the Giants (7-6) play host to the Philadelphia Eagles (7-6). Petitgout remains out indefinitely, and the line could be shuffled further. Center Shaun O'Hara has a sprained ankle and did not practice Wednesday. Right tackle Kareem McKenzie sprained his neck in Sunday's victory over the Carolina Panthers, but did practice.
        The Giants have allowed only two quarterback sacks in the four games that Whitfield has started. But when the Giants played the Eagles in September, they allowed eight sacks.
        That knowledge led Whitfield on a riff. ''That's the beauty of football, because whatever they did the last time, you've got an opportunity to correct it this time,'' he said. ''They get no advantage.''
        A few weeks ago, a career that started as the eighth overall choice in the 1992 N.F.L. draft was threatening to end -- not even comically in the locker room, but tragically on the field. Whitfield felt it coming.
        Now, he has visions of a happier, more useful exit. Asked last week when he thought Petitgout would return, Whitfield eschewed diplomacy.
        ''Probably right before we play in the Super Bowl,'' he said. ''We'll make it all the way through the playoffs, and he'll come and take his job back in the Super Bowl.''
        He laughed. Such an ending would be fitting. Whitfield would be able to make jokes about it, and it would mean that he did his job, all the way through December and January, without further embarrassment.
        EXTRA POINTS
        Giants Coach Tom Coughlin said that Boston College has asked to speak with the quarterbacks coach Kevin Gilbride about its head-coaching vacancy. Coughlin coached Boston College from 1991 to 1993.
        PRO FOOTBALL
      