
        A few weeks ago, New York's Gov. George Pataki announced the acquisition of a 575-acre tract of Orange County woodland from a developer who had wanted to build 107 mini-estates on it. As Mr. Pataki noted, the tract was the ''hole in the doughnut'' of a much larger woodland known as Sterling Forest that had been bought from the same developer, a Swiss insurance company, years earlier. Its purchase -- at a cost of $13.5 million -- capped a truly remarkable, 20-year-old conservation effort that promises lasting benefits to the citizens of New York and New Jersey alike.
        Straddling two counties in two states (Passaic County in New Jersey and Orange County in New York), Sterling Forest is centrally located in the New York/New Jersey Highlands, 1.1 million acres of contiguous habitat stretching from the Hudson River to the Delaware River. The forest itself covers roughly 20,000 acres of largely unspoiled woodlands, streams and lakes 40 miles northwest of New York City. It is a crucial source of drinking water for residents of northern New Jersey and an important recreational area for the entire region.
        Most of the forest was acquired in the late 1990s from the Swiss company, but only after an extraordinary, decade-long effort. The effort was organized, most crucially, by two nonprofit conservation groups -- the Trust for Public Land and the Open Space Institute -- and eventually involved the governors of New York and New Jersey, the United States Congress, the federal Forest Service, various quasi-public commissions, 20 or so private foundations and hundreds of individual donors.
        Overall, saving Sterling Forest has cost roughly $90 million. But it's been worth it, not only because New York and New Jersey are two of the most populous states in the union and thus need all the open space they can get, but also because the entire struggle is a testament to what the public and private sectors can accomplish when rational minds get together. That it has temporarily derailed the seemingly ineluctable March of the McMansions through the New York and New Jersey suburbs is further cause for celebration.
      