
        United Airlines and Continental Airlines have been holding talks on a potential merger, a combination that would create the biggest domestic airline, with a combined value of $9 billion, people involved in the negotiations said last night.
        The discussions, though far from complete, could spur a wholesale realignment of the airline industry.
        The talks, apparently initiated by United, recently picked up pace after US Airways' bid last month to buy Delta Air Lines for about $8 billion, these people said.
        US Airways' proposal, promising $1.65 billion a year in savings by joining with Delta, has helped add urgency to carriers' interests in merging.
        Large airlines like United, the second-largest domestic carrier, and Continental, the fifth-largest, have spent recent years lowering their costs to become more competitive with low-cost carriers and with each other. None of them want to be at a cost disadvantage to rivals.
        A United spokeswoman, Jean Medina, and a Continental spokesman, David Messing, declined to comment.
        Meanwhile, AirTran Holdings, a low-cost carrier that competes against Delta, is expected today to make an offer for Midwest Air, a smaller airline in Milwaukee, for about $200 million, or $11.25 a share, in cash and AirTran stock, a person close to the deal said last night.
        AirTran's chief executive, Joseph B. Leonard, could not be reached.
        United's chief executive, Glenn F. Tilton, and Continental's chief executive, Larry Kellner, have met in person to discuss a combination, a person with knowledge of the talks said.
        But two executives with knowledge of United's efforts expressed skepticism over the likelihood of a United-Continental deal. The executives, who requested anonymity because of their role, said Mr. Tilton had initially approached Delta, which said it was not interested, before contacting Continental.
        Mr. Tilton told analysts this week that, ''We are not waiting for opportunities to come to us simply because we haven't identified to you which one works best.''
        Mr. Kellner was in Tel Aviv on business yesterday.
        Any deal between the two airlines is far from imminent. A person with knowledge of the talks said United and Continental wanted to see how antitrust regulators react to a possible merger of US Airways and Delta. Delta's management opposes the proposal and intends to file its plan to exit bankruptcy next week.
        A flurry of meetings later this week among Delta creditors and others on the US Airways proposal could help decide whether Delta management will be forced to consider the US Airways offer.
        Many investors and analysts have maintained there are too many airlines operating in the United States, and that consolidation would help improve profit margins or reduce losses.
        Analysts have long favored a combination of United's Asian routes and heavy coverage of the Western United States with Continental's Latin American and European routes and its large and profitable hub in Newark.
        At the stock market's close yesterday, Continental's market capitalization was about $4 billion and United's was about $5 billion.
        Any effort by the two to merge would be complicated by an agreement Continental has with Northwest Airlines. That agreement could allow Northwest to block certain merger transactions involving Continental, but could allow Continental more freedom to enter into a combination if it were the acquiring party and if approval of its shareholders were not required.
        Also, if Northwest entered into a merger, it would lose its blocking power over Continental.
        The financial terms and other details of a combination are far from being worked out, people involved in the discussions said.
        The domestic airline industry is expected to be modestly profitable for 2006 and more solidly in the black for 2007, after more than $30 billion of losses in recent years.
        The continuing spread of Southwest Airlines and other low-cost carriers, along with consumers' increasing willingness to shop for air fares via the Internet, promises continuing pressure on profits.
        US Airways' merger with America West last year, reducing the combined carrier's costs and eliminating unprofitable routes, spurred interest in other combinations.
        Still, mergers are difficult. Seniority-based labor agreements make merging groups of pilots, mechanics and flight attendants contentious; the US Airways and America West labor groups have yet to complete their integration. And antitrust concerns have damped interest in potential combinations in the past.
        Mr. Tilton has been giving speeches in recent months, as he did on Monday, endorsing industry consolidation and saying United wants to play a part. But he has refused to comment on specific combinations. Mr. Kellner has mostly said that Continental prefers to remain independent, but he conceded recently that changes in the industry could force him to reconsider that position.
        Analysts generally hold Continental management in higher regard, and hope it would run any potential United-Continental carrier, rather than Mr. Tilton, a former oil executive. ''The key is the probability that Tilton takes his pile of noncash compensation and gives up United to Continental's management team,'' Roger King, an analyst at CreditSights, said in a report last month.
      