
        Ambitious federal plans to repair the Gulf Coast and defend it against future hurricanes are coming under fire from many coastal scientists who say they would only perpetuate a costly and wrongheaded approach to storm management.
        The projects are still in the planning stages by the Army Corps of Engineers, which has been ordered by Congress to present its long-term, comprehensive plans by the end of 2007.
        In addition to short-term repair projects, the corps is considering large and elaborate systems of walls and barriers, offshore breakwaters, dune reconstruction on offshore barrier islands, levees and mechanical barriers or gates that would close across inlets to keep surging storm waters out.
        Many scientists have long objected to seawalls, other coastal armor and even some beach restoration projects as costly interventions that can damage the very beaches they are supposed to protect. But they say the larger projects will have the same effects, only worse.
        ''The most shocking thing to me is that they would even consider some of the things that they are considering,'' said Robert J. Young, new director of the Program for the Study of Developed Shorelines, a project of Duke and Western Carolina universities.
        At a special session about the corps's proposals at a meeting of the Geological Society of America in October, Dr. Young said his fellow scientists ''were just stunned.'' Dr. Young, who helped organize the session, added, ''I saw mouths dropping open at the scale of proposed coastal engineering.''
        David B. Shaver, chief of the geological resources division of the National Park Service, said the session was important in making sure that ''the professional geological community was aware of what was going on.'' He is concerned with the proposals because they affect islands in the Gulf Islands National Seashore.
        The corps says it is working closely with state agencies, federal emergency management officials and environmental regulators, ''trying to come up with a plan that would retain the quality of life'' but also keep residents ''as far out of harm's way as possible,'' in the words of Susan Ivester Rees, a marine scientist with its Mobile district in Alabama, where much of the work is coordinated.
        ''We are putting a balanced emphasis on everything in as great detail as we can,'' she said. While there are ''a lot of innovative engineering solutions,'' she continued, the corps will look at relocation and other approaches ''beyond your typical asphalt on the ground.''
        The scientists and the corps agree on one point: Hurricane Katrina ''changed Mississippi's Gulf Coast forever,'' as the corps said in its outline of its proposals, ''Mississippi Coastal Improvements Program, Interim Report'' (http://mscip.usace.army.mil/downloads.asp).
        As the report puts it, ''beachfront neighborhoods were leveled entirely, and estimates by officials have calculated that 90 percent of the structures within one-half mile of the coastline were completely destroyed.''
        But Dr. Young said the corps's approach was ''designed to let those folks put most of that infrastructure back in place.''
        ''We have already seen those communities wiped out twice in 37 years,'' he went on, referring to Hurricane Camille, in 1969, and Hurricane Katrina. ''And it's not just that the coast of Mississippi is going to have the same vulnerability; the vulnerability is only going to increase because of sea level rise,'' which most climate experts agree is accelerating because of global warming.
        The proposal that seems to have aroused the most shock and amazement among the geologists would be the most seaward line of defense: a proposal to rebuild offshore barrier islands to their size and shape before Camille, an epic undertaking that would require almost unimaginable amounts of sand, to say nothing of money. ''We are in the billions, easily,'' said Rebecca Beavers, coastal geology coordinator for the Park Service and another organizer of the G.S.A. session.
        When the geologists at the meeting heard about this plan, ''some people were quite dismayed,'' she said. ''Some people were almost incensed.''
        Even Dr. Rees of the corps agrees that it is far from certain that any island-building project would be worth its economic and environmental cost.
        ''What we're looking at is restoring the footprint,'' she said, and building dunes perhaps 20 feet high on the islands. But one of them, Ship Island, was cut in two by Camille, and the separation has grown since then. Also, Dr. Rees said, a 20-foot dune, ''which is what was there prior to Camille, probably doesn't give you protection from a Katrina, because the surge at Katrina was higher than that.''
        The corps estimates that the storm surge at Ship Island was at least 35 feet. ''I cannot even imagine it,'' she said.
        In any case, Dr. Beavers said, under the Park Service mandate to maintain its islands in their natural state, restoration efforts are typically undertaken only to mitigate damage by people.
        Dr. Rees said, ''Obviously, this is going to take a lot of discussion.''
        A similar issue has also arisen, on a much smaller scale, elsewhere in the Gulf Islands National Seashore, on Santa Rosa Island, near Pensacola, Fla. There the issue is whether to rebuild a road that storms have washed out four times since 2004.
        The federal government is prepared to rebuild the road, but only if something is done to prevent it from washing out again. Engineers have proposed installing metal sheet piling and other armor. But more than a dozen coastal scientists from around the country have objected. In a letter to the Park Service, they say armoring the road will interfere with natural sand movement on the island, causing it to narrow. ''This is not science-based management,'' they wrote.
        Eventually, Dr. Rees predicted, the public will understand that it will not be possible to protect all the buildings and roads and other infrastructure on the coast without destroying what people love about the landscape. ''They do not want to see a 40-foot-high seawall,'' she said.
        Dr. Rees predicted that the region would end up with a mix of solutions, including coastal armor but also ''buyout, relocation, flood-proofing, elevating houses.''
        But no remedy is foolproof. Dr. Rees said, for example, that Hurricane Katrina destroyed a house she owned on Dauphin Island, Ala. ''The first floor of that house was plus-14,'' she said, referring to its elevation above sea level. ''If you start going much higher than that, not only is it very hard to access, but your construction considerations are tremendously magnified. On top of that, you put yourself into a totally different wind field.''
        That tells her, she said, that ''trying to come up with a plan that would retain the quality of life but also try to put people out of harm's way is not going to be possible everywhere.''
        ''Basically,'' Dr. Rees said, ''all we can do is educate the community.''
        But in the 30 years that she has lived in the region, she said, people seem to be learning the wrong lessons. Devastating coastal storms now serve not as warnings but as engines of development, sweeping existing structures away and leaving clear land for bigger and better buildings. ''That's been a typical response since the early 1980s,'' Dr. Rees said.
        ''In the Gulf Shores-Orange Beach area, they went from almost 100 percent single-family residences and very small hotels to high rise after high rise after high rise,'' she said. Seeing that stretch of Alabama coast today, she said, ''you could not in your wildest dreams imagine what it looked like then. It was a very nice place to live.''
      