
        The chairman and chief executive of Hewlett-Packard, Mark V. Hurd, assured analysts and investors yesterday in Manhattan that he planned to continue cutting costs but did not foresee making major acquisitions to maintain growth.
        ''We are a company that is transforming,'' Mr. Hurd said. ''We are not a company that is transformed.''
        H.P. said that net income could grow 11 percent in its current fiscal year, ending Oct. 31, and as much as 18 percent in fiscal 2008.
        Executives also forecast that revenue could continue to grow at a rate of 6 percent a year over the next two years, the same pace as 2006. Revenue in 2008 could reach $102.8 billion, compared with $91.7 billion in fiscal 2006.
        Net income grew 47 percent in 2006 on a comparable per share basis. ''I would not get too overexcited by 2006, nor would I want to understate what the company accomplished in 2006,'' Mr. Hurd said at the analysts' meeting.
        ''I do believe that market trends are playing to our strengths,'' he said. The company has been helped by the shift to notebook PCs from desktop models, to more energy-efficient blade servers for data centers and the boom in digital photography.
        The company forecast reflected a confidence in the overall economy in the next two years, as well as continued confidence in spending on information technology by businesses and consumers. Several analysts said that the company's forecasts tend to be conservative so as not to surprise investors.
        Some analysts have said that the company will have difficulty improving its earnings and profit margins once it completes a major reorganization, which includes layoffs of about 15,000 employees and changes to its retirement programs.
        Saying that the company still has ''significant opportunities to improve,'' Mr. Hurd cited plans to dispose of real estate as one way it intended to cut costs.
        He said the company eliminated three layers of management in the last two years, but that it will continue to hire more sales representatives.
      