
        If the Nets' Jason Kidd has 18 assists and 37 rebounds against the Milwaukee Bucks on Wednesday night, he will be averaging a triple-double for the season.
        Those are ridiculous, virtually impossible numbers for Kidd to achieve in a game (although he did have 18 assists in a game earlier this season, and has a career high of 25).
        But that Kidd, 33, is even flirting with averaging a triple-double is a remarkable accomplishment.
        Kidd recorded his 79th career triple-double in the Nets' victory over the Memphis Grizzlies on Monday night. With that, he surpassed Wilt Chamberlain for third place on the N.B.A. career list.
        He trails Oscar Robertson (181) and Magic Johnson (138), two Hall of Famers he is unlikely to catch.
        ''I think Wilt, his name alone talks historically; it's huge,'' Kidd said after the game against the Grizzlies. ''He changed the game of basketball. To be able to pass somebody who had an impact on the game, it's a great honor.''
        Before the season, Kidd was asked how he felt physically. He responded by saying he felt good enough to average a triple-double, a feat that only Robertson has achieved over the course of a season. Robertson averaged 30.8 points, 12.5 rebounds and 11.4 assists for the Cincinnati Royals during the 1961-62 season.
        It was difficult to take Kidd seriously. But he opened the season with 14 points, 10 assists and 10 rebounds against the Toronto Raptors, and has not slacked off since. After nearly a fourth of the season, Kidd is averaging 13.3 points, 9.6 assists and 8.7 rebounds.
        Vince Carter said he took Kidd seriously when he spoke of averaging a triple-double.
        ''J's one of those guys, when he puts his mind to it, he gets it done,'' Carter said.
        With a smile on his face, Carter added, ''He steals my rebound every now and then, but that's O.K.''
        Kidd is the only player in the N.B.A. averaging at least 7 rebounds and 7 assists. Kidd said he did not think much about his statistics, but they were an indication of how great Robertson was.
        ''I need like 30 rebounds one night,'' Kidd said. ''That just shows how difficult it is, how remarkable for Oscar, what he's done.''
        In the eyes of Coach Lawrence Frank, it would seem that Kidd is unrivaled, even though his statistics are not quite at Robertson's level.
        ''It's crazy what he does,'' Frank said. ''I don't care if he was 13, 23 or 43. To be able to do it at this level consistently, it's unbelievable. His will is an unbelievable deal. That's what makes him separate from everyone else.''
        PRO BASKETBALL
      