
        The federal government turned their lives upside down, but an Iranian immigrant couple, Aliakbar and Shahla Afshari, say they always believed in the system.
        The Afsharis' faith was rewarded earlier this month when the federal government admitted it made a mistake more than two-and-a-half years ago, when they were fired from their jobs with the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health in Morgantown, W.Va. The reason given for their dismissals was that they had failed a secret background check, 18 years after moving to the United States.
        The government agreed to pay more than $600,000 to settle a lawsuit filed by the couple after they were fired and escorted from their workplaces on May 5, 2004. The agreement also allows Mr. Afshari to return to his agency engineering job. Mrs. Afshari will not return to her job as a laboratory researcher because she is attending dental school.
        Most important, the Afsharis said, are the letters they received from the agency director, John Howard. Mr. Howard, who approved their dismissals, said they should not have happened.
        ''What we really wanted more than anything else in the world was to clear our name,'' said Mrs. Afshari.
        Since the government did not reveal why the Afsharis had failed the background checks, or why they were being checked so long after they came to the United States, their case drew concern from civil liberty groups.
        ''This case illustrates what can happen when government attempts to hide behind a veil of secrecy,'' said Andrew Schneider, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union of West Virginia.
        The Afsharis' lead lawyer, Allan N. Karlin, of Morgantown, said: ''The government never actually told us what it was that triggered this. All that is clear is that it was an association issue.''
        A Department of Justice spokesman, Charles Miller, said the government acknowledged settling the case, ''but that's all we can say.''
        The Afsharis said they thought they had been fired because they took their children to two conventions of the Muslim Students Association, in 1998 and 1999. On one trip, a friend later deported for immigration violations went with them. The Federal Bureau of Investigation has said the association has close ties to the Iranian government.
        Mr. Karlin said he had also learned that someone at the agency identified the couple's daughter, Azadeh, who was majoring in exercise physiology at West Virginia University and working at a clinic at the agency, as a ''foreign national'' and began asking questions about her.
        Their dismissal had severe repercussions for the family.
        Out of work, the couple spent their savings, cashed in their pension accounts and took on credit card debt to make ends meet.
        Some friends and colleagues shunned the couple, and a classmate told their younger son, Amin, then in sixth grade, that his parents were ''terrorists.''
        ''We had a really hard time,'' Mrs. Afshari, 45, said. ''But at the same time, we got to know who our real friends were, and got to know some really great people who helped us.''
        Mr. Afshari, 54, returned last week to his job. Albert E. Munson, an agency official who had objected to the dismissals, said: ''We are just terribly happy to have Ali back. He's just a great guy.''
        Last year, when the Afsharis became eligible to apply for citizenship, they considered not applying. The application is being processed.
        ''What we believed all along is that this is a great country,'' Mrs. Afshari said. ''Wrong things may happen, but as long as you have a chance to raise your voice and ask questions, you can get justice.''
      