
        A federal appeals court yesterday called into question the government's efforts to change the power industry into a more competitive business, ruling that national energy officials abdicated their responsibility to ensure fair electricity markets.
        The three-judge panel, in a decision that could still be appealed to the Supreme Court, ruled that California and other Western states can keep pursuing claims that they were overcharged billions of dollars for power during the regional energy crisis of 2000-1.
        More broadly, leaders on both sides of the debate over whether to push ahead with competitive markets or to retain the system of rate regulation that remains in half the states said that the case held major significance for the future of the $270 billion electricity industry.
        In blunt language in two lengthy decisions, the judges from the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, in San Francisco, took the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to task for refusing to even consider whether California, Nevada and Washington customers may have been gouged by Enron and other energy traders. They said the government agency should have seriously reviewed the situation to determine whether the contracts were unfair.
        The State of California and others sought to break their power contracts, saying they were the product of unfair market manipulations by some energy traders.
        The court ruled that the commission, in dismissing challenges to the contracts, acted improperly, applied standards unfairly and imbued its concept of markets with more legitimacy than was warranted based on federal law, the specific facts and its own determinations that Western electricity markets had been manipulated.
        The three-judge panel unanimously ordered the commission to hold new hearings to determine whether the prices in the contracts were ''just and reasonable.'' If the contracts are ultimately found to be unfair, the plaintiffs could be allowed to break their contracts with Enron, Morgan Stanley and others. That would open the door to recovering more of the billions of dollars they paid at the time.
        ''The ruling makes it clear that markets need to have a cop on the beat and that the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission failed to step in and do its duty as that cop,'' said William J. Kayatta Jr., a lawyer who argued the case for California. ''If the commission comes back and just says market prices are just and reasonable, they will be slapped down again.''
        Eric Christensen, who represented the Snohomish Public Utility District in Washington, which led the fight to show that Enron manipulated the energy markets, said the decision should end the commission's ''marching down a rigid ideological path of obeisance to markets that says all contracts are sanctified.''
        Industry officials said the ruling could throw up roadblocks to their efforts to bring more competition to the industry.
        ''To the extent these rulings stand and make it too easy to get out of long- term contracts,'' warned John E. Shelk, president of the Electric Power Supply Association, which represents power plant owners, ''it will put upward pressure on electricity prices.''
        ''Contract sanctity is important to sustaining long-term investment,'' he added.
        Morgan Stanley said it disagreed with the court but had not decided what to do next.
        The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission staff did not respond to requests for comment.
        The plaintiffs celebrated the ruling as setting an important precedent. Marilyn Showalter, a former Washington State utility regulator who represents municipal utilities as president of the Public Power Council, said the decision meant ''that the law trumps market theory.''
        Ms. Showalter and others pointed to the court ruling that even market prices must be in a ''zone of reasonableness'' related to the cost of producing electricity, saying this would force the commission to adopt rules to thwart bidding techniques, used for short times in periods of peak demand, to charge 100 times or more the cost of producing power.
        But the victors in the case also held out an olive branch to their opponents.
        Mr. Kayatta said that if federal regulators took the decision to heart it could eventually strengthen their efforts to spread competition.
      