
        The Dallas Cowboys do not have to worry about playoff possibilities Sunday while they watch the Philadelphia Eagles play the Giants. The Cowboys can relax, not just because they are assured of at least a one-game advantage in the National Football Conference East at the end of the day, but because Coach Bill Parcells might have been right when he insisted Dallas's lopsided loss last week to the New Orleans Saints was an aberration.
        There was talk that Dallas's midseason surge with quarterback Tony Romo was over after the 42-17 loss to the Saints, but Parcells said that the loss was a fluke and that his team was still fit for playoff run. The Cowboys sure looked like a different team Saturday night, defeating the Atlanta Falcons, 38-28, in the Georgia Dome.
        It was the fifth road victory of the season for the Cowboys, who improved to 9-5. The Giants and Eagles are 7-6 and play each other in a late afternoon game Sunday at Giants Stadium.
        With the Cowboys trailing, 28-21, in the third period, the defense gathered itself and shut down the Falcons, and the offense scored the last 17 points of the game.
        Leading by 31-28, Dallas put the game away with an 80-yard drive capped by Marion Barber III's 7-yard touchdown run with 2 minutes 18 seconds to play.
        ''Bill didn't have to tell us that wasn't us last week against the Saints,'' linebacker Bradie James said. ''Come on, I don't want to make excuses, but they had our plays; it was like they were listening in on our headsets.''
        James was referring to the former Dallas assistant coach Sean Payton, who is now head coach of the Saints. Payton was the Cowboys' offensive coordinator in 2005. The Cowboys gave up 536 yards to New Orleans.
        The Falcons looked as if they might get close to that yardage with quarterback Michael Vick suddenly looking as dangerous as a passer as he is as a runner. Vick riddled the Cowboys' man-to-man coverage, throwing four touchdown passes in a little over two quarters.
        Dallas was so worried about Vick's running, it built a game plan on man-to-man coverage in the secondary to better hem him. In the second half, the Cowboys mixed in more zone coverage and got some crucial stops on third down.
        ''The momentum completely switched,'' Dallas cornerback Terence Newman said.
        Vick, who set an N.F.L. record for single-season rushing yards for a quarterback (990 yards), completed 16 of 24 passes for 237 yards and 4 touchdowns. The Falcons slipped to 7-7, and their wild-card hopes suffered a blow.
        Vick injured a groin muscle in the fourth quarter and had to leave the game, but by then the Cowboys had a 10-point lead.
        The only thing the Falcons could feel good about at the end was that place-kicker Morten Andersen became the N.F.L.'s career scoring leader with an extra point in the second quarter. The 46-year-old Andersen has 2,437 points.
        While Vick was good, Romo was better. A week after his disastrous performance against the Saints, he completed 22 of 29 passes for 278 yards and 2 touchdowns.
        Romo took advantage of Atlanta's smallish cornerbacks Allen Rossum and DeAngelo Hall when they were in single coverage on the outside. Wide receivers Terry Glenn and Terrell Owens combined to catch 10 passes for 165 yards against a defense ranked 31st against the pass. Hall, who was beaten by Owens for two touchdown, said Owens spit in his face.
        The Cowboys raced out to a 14-0 lead after DeMarcus Ware's 41-yard interception return for a touchdown in the second quarter.
        But the Falcons rallied behind Vick, who was a precise passer in the second quarter, completing 6 for 9 for 121 yards and 2 touchdowns. He hardly looked like the league's 25th-rated passer.
        Atlanta let it leak to the news media this week that Vick was lining up as a running back in practice behind the backup quarterback Matt Schaub, and Vick did run as a tailback on some plays. The Cowboys would have wished he stayed there, considering how he picked them apart with short and long throws.
        On the first possession of the third quarter, Vick took the Falcons 55 yards in seven plays. His 5-yard touchdown pass to fullback Justin Griffith and Andersen's extra-point kick gave Atlanta a 28-21 lead with 11:09 left in the third quarter.
        But the Cowboys held Atlanta scoreless on its last four possessions of the game.
        PRO FOOTBALL
      