
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Learning to Keep Learning'' (column, Dec. 13):
        Thomas L. Friedman, in offering perspectives on the American public education system in the context of China's continued growth, gives us the hint of a major issue in education.
        I fear, however, that those responsible for our educational practices, at least in the public sector, are not reading or heeding.
        Every employer in the American economy knows that creative thinking is the gold standard he seeks in his employees. But our public schools, disabled by high-stakes standardized testing frenzy, which stifles creativity, and lack of appropriate financing levels, continue to decline while our international standing, educationally, plummets.
        One of the many reasons private schools continue to flourish is that they are much more willing to be innovative around issues of creativity than their bureaucracy-stifled, money-starved brethren in the public domain.
        If we were willing to create a partnership between the public education system and the independent schools, one that really took a long, hard look at what we need for global education and the global integrated world of the future, Mr. Friedman's advice might be much more than pearls cast before those who will not or cannot see.
        Jon McGill  Headmaster, Gilman School  Baltimore, Dec. 13, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Thomas L. Friedman calls into question China's ability to take innovation to the next level, based on its policy of limiting Internet access. Indeed, China has laws that try to prohibit free use of the Internet, which can and do present unique problems as it moves to become an innovative power.
        But even worse is a society without laws that prohibit access, where freedom has been a right but its people have seemingly lost interest in research and in their abilities to delve beneath the surface and challenge the status quo.
        Here in the United States, we are so overly dependent on the technology in our lives that we don't exercise our brains in the necessary ways to move into this new century as true leaders.
        We hear professors complain that their students find it difficult to read for content; we hear officials from all walks of life calling for increases in scientists, engineers and mathematicians; and at the same time, we encourage people to ''wire up'' for eight hours a day to gadgets that sap our creativity and limit our exposure to the ''real'' world.
        Access to electronic media without knowing how to use it to drive creativity is costing us dearly. China's imposed limits create a desire in its people for more; the freedom we take for granted has led us to become a nation of the uninterested. I think that we all know which is worse for our future.
        Robert Kesten  Executive Director, Center  for Screen-Time Awareness  Washington, Dec. 13, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Thomas L. Friedman made a number of excellent points regarding the importance of creative and innovative thinking and what needs to be emphasized in our school curriculums to make sure that we do not fall behind.
        To think creatively means to think outside the box. That kind of thinking needs role models, and who better serves that function than our artists and designers, whom we count on to bring us new visions and possibilities.
        All of this exposure can and should be found in a good school art program. As an art teacher in a public school for 35 years, I am forever wondering why every art program in this country has constantly to be justified, defended or put to rest whenever some new educational idea surfaces and needs to be tried out in place of the art class.
        Unfortunately, art programs are still considered a ''frill'' in our educational system, and here is where our youth really get the opportunity to use their imagination and to come up with creative ideas.
        Creativity is our greatest achievement. Let's make sure that the No Child Left Behind law doesn't leave our creative children behind.
        Linda Kastner  Garden City, N.Y., Dec. 13, 2006
        To the Editor:
        In my studies of more than 2,000 men and women, all members of Phi Beta Kappa, the honor society that promotes the importance of a well-rounded liberal arts education, I found that these academic high-achievers matured into adults who did well professionally, socially and personally.
        These Phi Beta Kappas had the type of education that Thomas L. Friedman described in his column.
        What I also gleaned from my research is that their strong love of learning was fostered by parents who loved to read and who filled their homes with books.
        These academic high-achievers also spoke of teachers, especially in the elementary grades, who supported their thirst for knowledge.
        Arline L. Bronzaft  New York, Dec. 13, 2006
        To the Editor:
        ''Weighing the Costs in Public vs. Private Colleges'' (Education page, Dec. 13) provided opinions on whether the cost of private higher education is worth the price. But the most compelling argument was found in Thomas L. Friedman's Dec. 13 column, ''Learning to Keep Learning.''
        Mr. Friedman predicted that the great nations of the 21st century will be those that ''develop the best broad-based education system'' that produces the most creative people.
        Private liberal arts colleges demand the best academically and engage the whole student. It's the kind of education I want for those tackling tough issues on my behalf: diplomats seeking Middle East peace; doctors treating my illness and me as a person; lawyers advocating and pursuing justice.
        I would also include authors helping me understand the human condition; manufacturers making excellent products and caring about their workers and the environment; and business leaders using the global economy to produce greater wealth and standards of living in sustainable ways.
        Worth it? Yes.
        Daniel F. Sullivan  President, St. Lawrence University  Canton, N.Y., Dec. 14, 2006
      