
        'How Low Can You Go?'  Anthology of the String Bass, 1925-1941  (Dust-to-Digital)
        Because the profoundest innovations in jazz happen in the rhythm section, and because bass players and drummers are usually not the bandleaders, there's still much juicy revision to be done in jazz history. The angle taken on ''How Low Can You Go?'' -- a three-disc survey of bassists from the period when the string bass eclipsed the tuba in jazz and popular music -- puts one more tack in the tire of jazz's great-man theory.
        The basses leap out of these recordings, all compiled by the musicologist Dick Spottswood. They formed that throb that remains the prime ingredient of important small-group jazz. Here are some great talents from the back of the bandstand: Steve Brown, the influential, virtuosic bassist of the Jean Goldkette Orchestra, who fills the air as he bows and slaps through a brilliant 1926 version of ''Dinah.''
        Wellman Braud and Walter Page, the imposing bassists of the early Ellington and Basie groups, respectively. Pops Foster. Artie Bernstein. Milt Hinton. Wilson Myers. Al Morgan. Jimmie Blanton. And one great woman: Thelma Terry, whose plump, swinging notes drive her own ensemble on some 1928 recordings.
        That's just in the jazz tracks; pretty soon the program starts edging toward Western swing, blues, Hawaiian music, and bands from Trinidad and the French Antilles. Some of these people are famous, as bassists go; some aren't. Some are nameless (the guy on Washboard Sam's ''Don't 'Low,'' from 1936). The entire third disc is devoted to Bill Johnson, who played with Louis Armstrong and King Oliver, but is heard here in more obscure appearances with early jazz, gospel and blues bands. It's arcana, but far from irrelevant.
        Tuning into the bass with this particular sequence of records can clear up one of the most elusive qualities of early jazz: its deep relationship to all this other new-world music. In four tracks between 1929 and 1932, for example, we hear the bassist Al Morgan with the Trinidadian bandleaders Wilmoth Houdini and Lionel Belasco; we also hear him in New Orleans and Harlem jazz groups. His rhythmic vocabulary and relationship to the beat is much the same. This was how cross-pollination worked. If this particular light bulb hasn't gone on for you before, it will now. (Ordering: www.dust-digital.com.)
        BEN RATLIFF
      