
        The chancellor of the City University of New York yesterday directed the president of City College to remove the names of two fugitives linked to violent crimes from the entrance to a student clubroom.
        Matthew Goldstein, the chancellor, called the designation of the room as the Guillermo Morales/Assata Shakur Community and Student Center ''unauthorized and inappropriate.''
        Ms. Shakur -- once known as Joanne Chesimard -- was a member of the Black Liberation Army convicted in the 1973 killing of a New Jersey state trooper. She is currently a federal fugitive living in Cuba. Mr. Morales, also in Cuba, was a leader of the Puerto Rican independence group known as the F.A.L.N., which claimed responsibility for a tavern bombing in Lower Manhattan that killed four people and injured others. Both were students at City College.
        Students at the center yesterday said the names had been posted there for 17 years, since a student group won the right to use the lounge in the aftermath of a campus shutdown over proposed tuition increases in 1989.
        A number of City College students interviewed yesterday -- as well as Gregory H. Williams, the college president -- said the names on the door had meant nothing to them. But one student who recognized them, Sergey Kadinsky, said he wanted to ''raise awareness and raise a debate.''
        The Daily News printed a letter from him on Monday complaining about the names, and followed up with an article and an editorial yesterday headlined ''Celebrating killers at City College.'' The News said the college had no intention of renaming the room.
        But yesterday the college was hit with complaints. City Council members James S. Oddo, Dennis P. Gallagher and Andrew J. Lanza, the council's three Republicans, said in a letter to CUNY released publicly, ''Unfortunately, this demonstrates that City College is woefully out of touch with the taxpayers who subsidize the university.''
        They added, ''The fact that CUNY employees would attempt to defend this outrage begs the question: 'What is going on over at CUNY?' ''
        They also said, ''A terrorist is a terrorist  period.''
        David Jones, president of the New Jersey State Troopers Fraternal Association, said, ''These are criminals, and there is no way they should be endorsed in a public institution with their names on the door.''
        After receiving Chancellor Goldstein's directive that the names be removed, Dr. Williams said yesterday in an interview that he would do just that and was trying to talk to the students. ''Hopefully they will see the error of their ways, and will take it down,'' he said. ''If not, we will take steps to take it down.''
        But the students were not ready to acquiesce.
        Rodolfo Leyton, a City College senior and the center's director, said students planned to speak to a lawyer, Ronald B. McGuire, and possibly ''seek legal remedies.'' The center sued college and university officials in 1998 when it discovered a surveillance camera in a smoke detector across from it. That suit is still pending.
        Mr. Leyton also said that while others view Ms. Shakur as guilty, ''we see her as a leader in her community who was framed and unlawfully convicted.'' He said minutes of college proceedings in September 1989 dedicated the room to one of the groups still using the center, Students for Educational Rights. Others also use the space.
        College officials said that they had not been able to track down the agreement giving the room to the students. Even those involved at the time were hazy about the 1989 tuition protests and what followed.
        Bernard W. Harleston, City College's president in 1989, said yesterday that while he had appointed a committee of student, faculty and staff after the protests, he did not recall any specifics about the room.
        And Mario M. Cuomo, New York's governor at the time, whom the student protesters had demanded to meet to discuss tuition increases, said yesterday that he did not recall much about the situation, except that he had vetoed the increase. He dismissed the debate over the names. ''Considering the problems we have in society,'' he said, ''I'm not sure this is one of the major upsets to our tranquillity and equilibrium.''
      