
        Attorney General-elect Andrew M. Cuomo yesterday announced four senior appointments to oversee operations when he replaces Eliot Spitzer next month, drawing top officials from the offices of the United States attorneys in Manhattan and Brooklyn.
        Mr. Cuomo said that the newly named officials were people with whom he had had little or no relationship before their selection by his transition committee. He also said he was seeking to fulfill a campaign pledge to make appointments that reflected the diversity of the state. The first four senior appointments include three women, one of whom is black and another Hispanic.
        Mr. Cuomo appointed Robin L. Baker, who is the deputy chief of appeals for the United States attorney's office for the Southern District of New York, as his executive attorney general for criminal justice. Ms. Baker has worked in the office of the United States attorney for 10 years, mainly prosecuting cases of gang activity, terrorism, organized crime and narcotics.
        Mr. Cuomo named Eric O. Corngold as his executive deputy attorney general for economic justice. Mr. Corngold is chief assistant United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York, where he has worked since 1990. For six years, he headed the office's business and securities fraud unit and prosecuted white-collar crimes.
        Mr. Cuomo named an official in the administration of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, Mylan L. Denerstein, as the executive deputy attorney general for social justice. Ms. Denerstein is the deputy commissioner for legal affairs for the New York City Fire Department. She is also the highest-ranking black woman in the department.
        Before going to the Fire Department, Ms. Denerstein worked in the United States attorney's office, Southern District, from 1996 to 2003, serving as deputy chief of the criminal division.
        Mr. Cuomo announced the appointment of Jenny Rivera as the special deputy attorney general for civil rights. Ms. Rivera is a professor at the City University of New York law school. She is also a member of the New York City Commission on Human Rights and a former associate counsel for the Puerto Rican Legal Defense Fund.
        The selections brought praise from some independent legal experts yesterday, assuaging concerns that Mr. Cuomo might not follow the lead of his predecessor, Mr. Spitzer.
        ''They all seem to be extraordinarily well qualified, diverse and people with a broad range of experience,'' said Nils Olsen, the dean of the law school at the State University of New York at Buffalo.
        ''These sound like excellent appointments that have significant experience in the highest level of public law. It sounds like a good start. I think we can look forward to continued excellence that the attorney general's office displayed under Mr. Cuomo's predecessor.''
      