
        Mayor Richard M. Daley, one of America's longest serving big-city mayors, announced Monday that he will seek reelection to a sixth term in February. The decision comes as a federal inquiry into his administration's hiring practices has drawn closer to the mayor's office at City Hall.
        Current and former top officials in city agencies and political organizations with close ties to Mr. Daley have been indicted, mainly on accusations that they helped unqualified candidates get city jobs in return for favors and support. Mr. Daley has not been charged with any crime, and he has repeatedly defended his nearly 18-year tenure.
        In announcing his candidacy at a youth center on the city's South Side, Mr. Daley briefly acknowledged concerns about the abuse of power on his watch, highlighting new fund-raising rules for his campaign and a reworking of the city's hiring and contracting systems.
        ''The best way to show responsibility is to address the problems directly, so the mistakes of the past won't be repeated,'' he said. ''And that's what I've tried to do.''
        Mr. Daley, a 64-year-old Democrat, begins his campaign without the worry of a serious opponent. The two congressmen considered most able to mount a formidable challenge, Jesse L. Jackson Jr. and Luis V. Gutierrez, have announced that they will not run.
        If Mr. Daley wins re-election and serves a full term, he will surpass by one year the 21 years his father, Mayor Richard J. Daley, spent in office. Already, Mr. Daley, first elected in 1989, is called by his father's honorary title, ''Mayor for Life.'' Together, father and son have done more to shape the modern political history of Chicago, the nation's third-largest city, than perhaps any other force.
        At a morning news conference, Mr. Daley said he had asked himself a number of questions before deciding to run again.
        ''Do I believe Chicago is the best it can be?'' he said. ''Or can we be even better? And do I have more to give to our great city? Today, I'm here to answer with all my heart and soul. And the answer is yes, I have more to give to keep Chicago moving forward.''
        Mr. Daley pointed to new libraries and schools, the reduction in the rate of violent crime, the large-scale destruction of troubled public housing, and what he called the rebirth of downtown.
      