
        It was around this time last winter that Johnny Damon was a free agent, hoping the Boston Red Sox would make a compelling offer to keep him. The Red Sox, practicing fiscal restraint, never budged from a four-year, $40 million proposal.
        A year later, Damon is making $13 million a season as the Yankees' center fielder and the Red Sox are free spenders again. They announced their $103.1 million investment in pitcher Daisuke Matsuzaka yesterday, a week after giving outfielder J. D. Drew $70 million for five years.
        To some fans, Drew's contract was startling compared with the hard line the Red Sox took with Damon. But if it bothered Damon, he was not saying so yesterday.
        ''I got a great offer and a great contract from the Yankees, and I'm happy,'' Damon said. ''You can't always look back and say what could have been. Maybe they learned a lot from what happened last year. They finished in third place. They definitely needed to go out and make a statement. It seems like they're kind of doing that. It's definitely going to be another great year in the A.L. East.''
        Life seems perpetually sunny for Damon, who spoke to reporters on a conference call arranged by the Yankees. There was no news to report -- Damon's wife, Michelle, is due to deliver the couple's first child around Jan. 1 -- but Damon seemed comfortable talking about any subject.
        He said he wanted the Yankees to retain Bernie Williams and give more playing time to Melky Cabrera. He also endorsed the idea of signing Doug Mientkiewicz to play first base.
        ''There's not too many first basemen who could save two or three runs a game, but I got to see Doug do it, and it's amazing,'' said Damon, who won the World Series with Mientkiewicz for the Red Sox in 2004.
        ''He's a contact hitter with the right work ethic and the right people pushing him. He could produce for us. But defensively, I haven't seen a better player than Doug. If we picked him up, it would be great.''
        The Yankees have made no progress in their talks with Shea Hillenbrand, a veteran right-handed first baseman who wants a multiyear contract. Mientkiewicz, a former Gold Glove winner, is coming off back surgery. He would cost less than Hillenbrand and could be the left-handed hitter in a platoon with Andy Phillips or Josh Phelps.
        But a roster of 12 pitchers, eight everyday players and two first basemen leaves only three more spots. Those would be filled by a backup in the infield, at catcher and in the outfield, a job that belongs to Cabrera.
        Williams, 38, is the longest-tenured Yankee, and it would be awkward to take him to spring training without a spot on the 25-man roster. He batted .281 with 12 home runs and 61 runs batted in last year.
        ''He deserves to be in a Yankee uniform,'' Damon said. ''Whatever I need to do or anybody else needs to do to have him come back, it's a no-brainer for us. If I have to go play first base, I'll do it for a few games here and there just so we can work Bernie in.''
        The Yankees still need a left-handed reliever, and Cabrera could be used in a trade. He has value based on his production last season: a .280 average in 460 at-bats, with a .360 on-base percentage and nearly as many walks (56) as strikeouts (59).
        Manager Joe Torre started Cabrera in the Yankees' final playoff game, citing the jolt he gives to the lineup. Damon said Torre must let Cabrera play.
        ''Joe's going to have to deal with having to shuffle him around,'' Damon said. ''It seemed like when he played, things happened. Guys didn't try to score on him. He played left field flawlessly, and his numbers from the leadoff spot were pretty solid, too. I would love to see him play 120, 130 games. We'll find a way.''
        INSIDE PITCH
        Hector Noesi, a pitcher for the Yankees' Gulf Coast League team in Tampa, Fla., was suspended for 50 games after testing positive for a banned performance-enhancing drug. Noesi, 19, pitched in five games last year, allowing no earned runs. He is skinny (6 feet 2 inches, 174 pounds) and does not throw especially hard, topping out at about 92 miles an hour. ''I would consider him a solid prospect, but not a top prospect,'' said Gil Patterson, a minor league pitching coach for the Yankees. ''It's a shame it happened, because you'd look at him and never suspect it. With our conditioning program, they shouldn't need anything else.''  The Yankees have until Dec. 28 to sign Kei Igawa, the Japanese starter whose rights cost them $26 million. ''We are making good progress,'' Igawa's agent, Arn Tellem, said in an e-mail message. ''However, I do not anticipate reaching a deal this week.''
        BASEBALL
      