
        IT is easy enough to simulate a view of the ocean's depths: sit in a pitch-black room, then tie a thick blindfold around your eyes.
        ''In some waters, like in Hawaii, there is a sort of perpetual twilight even at 1,000 feet, and you can actually see a few feet in front of you,'' said Phil Nuytten, president of Nuytco Research, a deep-sea exploration company in North Vancouver, British Columbia. ''But in most parts of the world, at 1,000 feet it's like there's a hood over your head. You see nothing.''
        The miniature submersibles that explore shipwrecks, prospect for energy and film nature documentaries must be outfitted with powerful lanterns like the Newtlite from Nuytco. Available in a range of wattages, the Newtlite is designed to bathe the dark sea in a vivid daytime glow while withstanding the crushing pressure of ultradeep water.
        Common light bulbs, with their coiled tungsten filaments and metal contacts, are not resilient enough for deep-sea tasks. The Newtlite uses a technology called hydrargyrum medium-arc iodide. In an H.M.I. light, a mechanism known as a ballast sends electricity down a cable toward a bulb filled with mercury gas. The electricity stimulates the gas to emit a bright glow. Because an H.M.I. light does not use a filament, a sharp jolt will not make it malfunction.
        Before designing the Newtlite, Mr. Nuytten, whose company also builds submersibles, favored a rival lighting technology, quartz iodide. ''They produce a light that is very warm, but it's way off in color balance,'' he said. ''Ideally, what you want is a light that provides the exact color temperature of sunlight at noon.'' H.M.I. lanterns produce a color temperature of 5,600 Kelvin, which correlates to a cloudless summer day.
        In 2001, hoping to add H.M.I. lights to a new Nuytco submersible, the DeepWorker 2000, Mr. Nuytten approached a supplier about buying several off-the-shelf units. He was stunned to find out that, aside from weighing a hefty 90 pounds each, the lamps sold for $12,000 to $15,000 each.
        Mr. Nuytten told the supplier that he could build a more manageable H.M.I. light for a fraction of that cost. '' 'Well, then I guess that's what you better do,' '' Mr. Nuytten recalled the supplier saying.
        Mr. Nuytten and his engineering team at Nuytco tinkered with the design for months, paying special attention to potential ''failure points'': places where the cable might fray after extended use, or where the casing might not adequately protect the ballast. ''It was quite a metallurgical puzzle,'' said Mr. Nuytten, who said the key to completing the Newtlite was identifying the right heat-tempered aluminum alloy for the lantern's body.
        For the bulbs, Mr. Nuytten chose a hardy quartz glass with a somewhat rectangular shape. The more spherical a bulb, the more likely it is to shatter when squeezed by deep-sea pressure, he said.
        Prototypes were tested in a Nuytco water chamber capable of replicating conditions 3,000 feet below the ocean's surface.
        Mr. Nuytten sold his first Newtlite in 2002. It was priced at $5,000 and weighed five pounds. The initial customers were underwater film crews, including one from the National Geographic Society. More recently, the Newtlite has proved popular among military and commercial clients, who attach the lamps to marine robots rather than submersibles piloted by humans.
        Nuytco, which has sold several hundred Newtlites, is preparing a hand-held version. As is the case with all of the company's products, inquiries can be made by using the contact information at Nuytco.com.
        Given the hazards of serious deep-sea exploration, it would be best to inquire only if you really know what you're doing. In addition to being perpetually dark, the ocean is not known for being merciful.
        OPENERS: THE GOODS
      