
        Rutgers fans served by Time Warner Cable's digital service in the New York-New Jersey area will be able to see the Scarlet Knights play Kansas State on the NFL Network in the Texas Bowl on Dec. 28.
        The game will be available as part of a free preview from Dec. 24-30 that the network, owned by the N.F.L., offered last week to Time Warner and Cablevision. The offer was made to ensure that fans whose cable systems lack deals with the channel can see Rutgers play in the game.
        The league relented yesterday on its demand that the preview be seen only on the broader expanded basic service. Time Warner claimed that it could not pre-empt a channel on that tier to make room for the network.
        ''We saw that this was the quickest and best way to get the Rutgers appearance to the Time Warner subscribers and to get our six days of network programming in front of them as well,'' said Joe Browne, a spokesman for the N.F.L.
        Browne said the league was convinced that by allowing the preview to be seen on digital basic, it would reach 75 percent of Time Warner's 1.4 million subscribers in the New York-New Jersey market.
        Mark Harrad, a spokesman for Time Warner Cable, said: ''We're delighted. This is great news for Rutgers fans and our customers.''
        Whether a similar compromise will happen with Cablevision is uncertain. It responded to the network's offer of a free preview by issuing a news release that said it would carry only the game coverage, not the preview, on its expanded basic tier. But its counteroffer was apparently never conveyed to the league. Cablevision has three million subscribers in the market.
        ''We haven't heard from them,'' Browne said.
        The Texas Bowl's lack of availability to Rutgers fans on the NFL Network -- which has 41 million cable and satellite subscribers nationwide -- prompted intervention with the league by Senator Frank Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey, where 70 percent of cable customers do not get the NFL Network. After Lautenberg spoke to Commissioner Roger Goodell last week, the network offered the preview as a way to show the Rutgers game and showcase itself.
        Browne said the decision to let Time Warner carry the preview to digital basic customers was made by Goodell yesterday in consultation with Steve Bornstein, the president of the network, and others.
        FOOTBALL
      