
        The number of death sentences in the United States has dropped to its lowest level in decades, according to recent studies, including one released Thursday that predicts the trend will continue because of publicity about cases in which people are wrongly accused of crimes.
        The Death Penalty Information Center, a group based in Washington, reported that the number of death sentences, which had remained at about 300 a year in the 1990s, began to drop steadily in 1999 and has declined almost 60 percent since then.
        At the Justice Department, the Bureau of Statistics reported last week that there were 128 death sentences in 2005, down from 138 the year before. While the department study does not include an estimate for 2006, the Death Penalty Information Center, which opposes the death penalty and tracks cases closely, says the number for this year will be about 114.
        Defense lawyers, prosecutors, and groups that study the application of the death penalty all say there are several reasons for the trend. Among them are increased publicity about cases other than murder in which DNA testing resulted in freeing people who had wrongly been convicted of crimes, producing skepticism about the reliability of verdicts; recent Supreme Court decisions requiring that juries be told when life in prison without possibility of parole is an option, and improved legal representation for capital defendants, including a sharp increase in using specialists to develop arguments for mitigation.
        Mitigation specialists assist defense lawyers by investigating and presenting evidence to persuade juries to spare the defendant's life.
        Richard C. Dieter, who heads the Death Penalty Information Center, said in an interview that the number of executions and the total population on death rows throughout the country had also declined in recent years.
        But Mr. Dieter said the annual rate of death sentences was the best index for judging the trend because it showed what verdicts were rendered by juries in particular time periods. The other figures can be misleading. For example, if executions went up suddenly, that would mean an abrupt decrease in the death row population.
        A Gallup poll earlier this year showed that for the first time, Americans were almost evenly split when asked to choose which is a better penalty for murder, a death sentence or a life sentence without possibility of parole. Until recently, the public had overwhelmingly responded in favor of the death penalty.
        Mr. Dieter said the effect of the exposure of cases in which DNA established a person's innocence after conviction was hard to measure but probably significant.
        ''You could call this the DNA era,'' he said. ''It's been quite a phenomenon over the last eight years and has had a great impact in raising doubts about the reliability of verdicts.''
        Joshua Marquis, the district attorney in Clatsop County, Oregon, agreed that the publicity over wrongful convictions overturned by DNA evidence might be a factor.
        But Mr. Marquis, a vice president of the National District Attorneys Association, said it was not one of the significant reasons but was promoted by groups like Mr. Dieter's who want to ''create the myth of innocence, that the public should be fearful of the death penalty because we're executing innocent people.''
        Mr. Marquis said DNA testing, usually used in crimes like rape, had never established that an innocent person was executed. The reasons for the decline in the death penalty, he said, generally involved greater discrimination among prosecutors in bringing capital cases and the significant drop in the rates of violent crime and murders.
        Christina Swarns, director of the criminal justice project at the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, said that while DNA evidence had yet to prove that an execution was wrongful, that might soon change. Ms. Swarns pointed to investigations of three executions in Missouri and Texas.
        Other possible factors in the reduction of death sentences, experts say, are the truth-in-sentencing laws and recent Supreme Court opinions that require juries to be told when a sentence of life in prison without parole means just that. Mr. Marquis said that in Oregon, people sentenced to life used to serve little more than eight years on average.
        The Supreme Court, in a series of rulings chastising South Carolina courts over several years, said juries must be told when they are able to impose a sentence of life that will insure that the inmate will never be released. Mr. Dieter said that in the past juries often imposed death sentences because they believed, sometimes correctly, that the defendant could be released before death.
        Robert Rothman, a member of the American Bar Association's committee on the death penalty, said the increased use of mitigation specialists by defense lawyers had also contributed to the decreasing frequency of the death penalty.
        Mr. Rothman, an Atlanta lawyer, said the specialists were experts at investigating a defendant's background and preparing it for presentation to a jury. He said the bar association's guidelines now made clear that a lawyer had an obligation not only to argue a client was innocent but also to present a thorough argument for the mitigating circumstances.
        Correction:  December 19, 2006, Tuesday  An article on Friday about a decrease in the use of the death penalty in the United States referred incorrectly to a method of investigating whether innocent people had been wrongfully executed in Texas and Missouri. Investigations in those two states do not involve the use of DNA evidence.
      