
        A long-torn hole in Harlem's skyline was mended yesterday when the Ephesus Seventh-Day Adventist Church on Lenox Avenue got its steeple back in full.
        To peals of excited laughter and a couple of exultant whoops from congregants gathered at the intersection of 123rd Street, workers hoisted a replacement pinnacle of lead-coated copper and steel -- itself almost four stories tall -- and set it atop the existing stone steeple, which was truncated about 35 years ago after a fire.
        It took only nine minutes to lift the 7,000-pound pinnacle into place. But several lifetimes' worth of memories were conjured by the sight, as church members from their 40s through their 70s told how the old spire towered over the surrounding brownstone blocks.
        Renee Nixon-Simmons recalled being able to see it as a girl from a playground at 113th Street and Second Avenue and pointing it out proudly to her schoolmates. ''That's my church,'' she would say.
        Elihu Hassell McMahon recalled the way it loomed into view as he and his father walked to church from the Bronx across the Third Avenue Bridge. ''No matter where you were uptown, you could see the spire,'' he said.
        And Joseph Merriweather recalled spying it from the Empire State Building.
        He also recalled the fire on Jan. 9, 1969, that left the top of the steeple so weakened that it had to be removed a few years later. What was most memorable about that otherwise awful night, he said, was the heartening moment when the fire captain gave the order, ''Don't destroy the windows!''
        Ephesus has been rebuilding its home -- on and off -- since then.
        Originally the Second Collegiate Church of Harlem, the Victorian Gothic building was designed by John Rochester Thomas and constructed in 1886. Ephesus has been there since 1930.
        Page Ayres Cowley Architects are responsible for the current $2.2 million renovation, including the steeple restoration. S. Kraus Restoration, the general contractor, worked with the Durable Slate Company and Scherer Fabrication of Grove City, Ohio, where the new spire was made.
        Looking beyond copper and steel, Rupert W. Young, the interim senior minister, saw the new pinnacle as a ''beacon of hope and love for the community.''
        After that 37-foot beacon was set snugly in place, Irene Bethea, a congregant, approached Dr. Young.
        ''I feel like crying,'' she told him. She was smiling broadly as she said so.
      