
        It's hard to know what to say about ''3 Minutes of Pork and Shoving,'' other than it was one of the most enjoyable, language-defying performances I've seen in a long time.
        This 75-minute show, at P.S. 122, consisted of five short works (including the title piece, which lived up to its name), created by Kristin Van Loon and Arwen Wilder, who are a Minneapolis duo known as Hijack, and Scott Heron, a New Orleans-based performer who has graced many a New York stage with his unreasonable physical reasoning.
        In his solo, ''Louisa Street (Every house on the even side, starting from the river, July 29, 2006),'' Mr. Heron clomped onto a darkened stage, his sharply etched face illuminated by a small light attached to his head like homespun, backward spelunking gear. As his snapshots of the ragged New Orleans street flashed by on the backdrop, he arranged himself behind a microphone as if to speak, then brought his hands slowly up in front of his chest, miming rising water. He did a funny little dance. Then he clomped off. It would be difficult to think of a stranger or better tribute to the voiceless victims of Hurricane Katrina.
        It takes an incredibly deft touch to hold such silliness and pain together, but the women of Hijack seem to possess it also. In ''Speculum,'' choreographed by Hijack/Ms. Wilder, Ms. Van Loon's nutty behavior was observed by an increasingly less detached Mr. Heron. The Eagles' ''Desperado'' was involved, along with Andrew Lloyd Webber and the Eurythmics, and the piece still managed a haunting choreographic logic. A similar juxtaposition between cool formalism and hot insanity was Hijack's ''Fetish,'' an obsessive but oddly tender deconstruction of the creative process.
        And what to say about Mr. Heron's ''Stacked Double Cow''? There was quirky but tightly structured movement. There was a colostomy bag. Sarah Silverman, another artist who delights in the inappropriate, would have approved.
        ''3 Minutes of Pork and Shoving'' continues through tomorrow, with performances at 5 and 8 p.m. today and 5 p.m. tomorrow, at P.S. 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, East Village, (212) 352-3101.
        DANCE REVIEW
      