
        Dell, the computer maker, said yesterday that its chief financial officer was stepping down as the company faces two federal investigations into its accounting practices,.
        The financial officer, James M. Schneider, will be succeeded on Jan. 1 by Donald J. Carty, a company director and the former chairman and chief executive of the AMR Corporation, the parent company of American Airlines.
        While Dell would not say Mr. Schneider's unexpected departure was linked to the investigations into its accounting practices by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, the company did not dispel that speculation.
        A Dell spokesman said Mr. Schneider was not fired and described it as ''a retirement.'' Mr. Schneider will assist Mr. Carty through the end of Dell's fiscal year on Feb. 2, the spokesman said.
        The company said Mr. Schneider had told management of his intentions to resign on Friday.
        Frontier Bancshares, a bank holding company in Austin, Tex., announced yesterday that Mr. Schneider would become its executive chairman.
        It will be Mr. Carty, not Mr. Schneider, who will be responsible for signing off on the company's accounting. Dell has not yet filed its second- and third-quarter financial statements with the S.E.C.
        According to Dell, the investigations involve the company's accounting practices ''relating to accruals, reserves and other balance-sheet items.''
        It said it was cooperating with both investigations, but the company has not provided investors with any additional information since its September announcement. Dell has also said it risks being delisted by Nasdaq because of its failure to file the financial reports.
        Dell shares closed at $26.28 in after-hours trading. It had closed at $26.13 during regular trading.
        Mr. Schneider was a crucial member of Dell's top management. He was recruited to the company in 1996 from MCI where he had served as the senior vice president of finance. He was named chief financial officer in 2000 and was responsible for controller and treasury functions as well as investor relations.
        Mr. Schneider could not be reached for comment. The company released a statement by Mr. Schneider that said: ''It's been a real honor to make a contribution over the last 10 years as a part of Dell's leadership team. I look forward to sharing my knowledge and expertise with Frontier Bancshares and several other organizations that I have developed a personal interest in over the years.''
        The company stressed that Mr. McCarty, 60, knows Dell well, having been a director since 1992. He also has experience as a chief financial officer of AMR, a company spokesman said. Mr. Carty was forced out of AMR in 2003 after making a critical misstep during negotiations with American Airline's unions over wage and benefit concessions. The unions discovered he had secretly approved bonuses for himself and members of senior management.
        Mr. Dell said in a statement issued by the company, ''Don's remarkable management experience and his strong understanding of our company make him an ideal candidate to help lead our Dell 2.0 initiative.''
      