
        In a plan to exit bankruptcy, managers at Delta Air Lines valued the carrier at $9.4 billion to $12 billion and said its board had rejected US Airways' $8.5 billion bid.
        The announcement begins the second phase of what could be a drawn-out battle for control of the country's third-largest airline.
        Delta also projected strong and uninterrupted growth in revenue and profits through 2010, despite the airline industry's history of regular and sharp downturns. The plan relies on a continuing shift of planes from domestic service to international routes, where there is less low-cost competition.
        Gerald Grinstein, the chairman and chief executive of Delta, who has said little publicly since US Airways' hostile bid on Nov. 15, disparaged the offer, a sign that the battle could turn nastier.
        Noting that US Airways has not yet fully integrated America West Airlines after their merger a year ago, Mr. Grinstein said in an interview, ''They basically have an undigested meal and they're trying to eat another one.''
        He said US Airways had scored lower than Delta on customer satisfaction surveys by J. D. Power & Associates, a consumer research firm. ''From a passenger point of view, it's a nightmare,'' he said. Delta also repeated assertions that the US Airways proposal could not win antitrust approval and would so upset workers that service would suffer.
        US Airways, in a statement after the filing of the Delta bankruptcy plan, said, ''We remain a disciplined and determined bidder.'' W. Douglas Parker, chief executive of US Airways, has said that the proposed merger would result in $1.65 billion of annual savings, on top of whatever results that Delta projects.
        No announcement was made by the official committee of Delta creditors, whose claims in the bankruptcy will convert into new Delta common shares, giving them control over the carrier's future. Daniel H. Golden, a lawyer for the committee at Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld, did not return a call seeking comment.
        The committee could endorse the Delta plan, effectively ending US Airways' bid. It could order Delta to allow US Airways to conduct due diligence on Delta, which would also signal to other airlines that competing bids might be welcome. Or it could try to extract improved terms from US Airways or even a different exit plan from Delta, perhaps one that paid out a combination of cash and stock to creditors.
        An adviser to US Airways, who spoke on the condition of not being named because of a continuing role in the negotiations, said the creditors might not signal their intentions until after the first of the year. It also may take US Airways that long to analyze Delta's disclosures about its financial prospects and decide if it wants to raise its bid.
        With Delta not planning an exit from bankruptcy until next spring, ''there's not a big hurry here,'' the adviser said.
        At an estimated $9.4 billion to $12 billion, the value would pay unsecured creditors 63 percent to 80 percent of their claims against Delta. Existing shareholders would receive nothing.
        In its forecast, Delta said it expected to report net income of about $1 billion a year by 2008. Revenue from passengers is forecast to rise an average of 6 percent a year from 2007 to 2010 as Delta's fleet expands, its planes fly fuller and fares rise.
        The projections assume an increase in fuel costs of just 5 percent a year from 2008 to 2010.
        In other words, just about everything is expected to go Delta's way, in an industry that rarely enjoys such good fortune. Edward H. Bastian, the chief financial officer, said the carrier's relatively low costs, low debt loads and ability to shed assets through renegotiated leases would make it less vulnerable in a downturn.
        ''Projections are made to be broken and they're usually broken on the downside,'' said Roger King, an airline analyst at CreditSights, ''because only optimists pay for them.''
      