
        Another longtime Republican House seat has fallen to the Democrats.
        In the last Congressional election of 2006, former Representative Ciro D. Rodriguez, 60, unseated the seven-term Republican incumbent, Henry Bonilla, 52, in a hard-fought runoff in the redrawn 23rd Congressional District in southwest Texas.
        With 244 of 267 precincts reporting, Mr. Rodriguez had 55 percent of the votes to Mr. Bonilla's 45 percent.
        Mr. Rodriguez's victory increases the Democrats' commanding House majority, giving them 233 seats to the Republicans' 202, including independents who align with the Democratic caucus, according to a New York Times analysis of the voting results. Republicans had a 232 to 203 majority in the outgoing Congress.
        The sparsely populated district, the largest in Texas, covering about a fifth of the state's total square-mileage, was redrawn by federal judges after the Supreme Court found that the 2003 Republican-engineered redistricting, otherwise Constitutional, had diluted Hispanic voting strength to help Mr. Bonilla. The new district raised the Hispanic voting-age population to 61 percent from 51 percent, to the evident benefit of Mr. Rodriguez, a three-term congressman from the neighboring 28th Congressional District who lost the 2004 and 2006 Democratic primaries to Henry Cuellar, now the representative there.
        The race in the new 23rd District had been heated in recent weeks, with former President Bill Clinton coming in to campaign for Mr. Rodriguez, and President Bush's nephew George P. Bush, son of Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida, campaigning for Mr. Bonilla.
        In the Nov. 7 open primary, Mr. Bonilla failed to avoid a runoff by capturing less than 49 percent of the vote, while Mr. Rodriguez, fending off other Democrats, came in second with less than 20 percent.
        Mr. Bonilla had portrayed the contest as the opening gun of the presidential election year races. ''We look at this as the first election of the next cycle,'' he told The Associated Press.
        Mr. Rodriguez had said that on Election Day, five weeks ago, Americans voted for change. He had predicted that in Tuesday's runoff, people were ''going to vote one more time for change.''
      