
        House Democrats are seriously exploring the creation of an independent ethics arm to enforce new rules on travel, lobbying, gifts and other issues that Democrats intend to put in place on taking power next month.
        Senior party officials said Tuesday that Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the incoming speaker, had consulted with Representative John A. Boehner of Ohio, the minority leader, on forming a bipartisan group to examine outside enforcement. The goal would be to have the group report back in the spring.
        An independent Congressional watchdog, if approved, would be a major break with tradition. Some lawmakers say House and Senate members have sole responsibility for policing themselves when it comes to internal rules.
        Some lawmakers have said an independent entity could be unconstitutional.
        The Democratic officials, who spoke only if they were not publicly identified because the proposal for the new panel was now being presented to lawmakers, said the prominence of corruption as a concern in the elections last month gave new impetus to such an idea.
        ''With ethics such a big issue coming out of the election, members see a need to think outside the box,'' one senior official said.
        Several ideas have circulated about setting up an independent review board. A coalition of House and Senate lawmakers has proposed a professional Office of Public Integrity that would consider and investigate ethics complaints.
        Other lawmakers have called for review by a bipartisan group of former members of Congress.
        Most believe any independent group would have to work with the existing ethics committee, which is made up of an even number of House Republicans and Democrats and has the power to punish lawmakers up to expulsion.
        Similar ideas have run into serious opposition in the past. Most recently, the Senate decisively rejected creation of a public integrity office, a proposal originally included in a package of rules changes instituted last spring.
        Senate backers of the public integrity office, including Senators Susan Collins, Republican of Maine; Joseph I. Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut; and John McCain, Republican of Arizona, renewed their push last week.
        Mrs. Pelosi and other House Democratic leaders have grown more serious about the independent watchdog approach as a way to demonstrate their commitment to enforcement after a string of corruption scandals tied to the former lobbyist Jack Abramoff, a major military contracting case and questions about pet projects included in legislation.
        Self-styled Congressional watchdogs have long clamored for independent review of the conduct of members of Congress, saying lawmakers have shown an inability to hold their colleagues accountable in all but the most egregious cases.
        For example, the ethics committee report last week on the conduct of former Representative Mark Foley of Florida was attacked. Critics said it documented negligence by the Republican leadership in monitoring Mr. Foley's contacts with teenage pages yet failed to recommend punishment for any of those involved.
        The Democratic officials said the idea of independent enforcement of House rules had been gaining momentum before the Foley report and was not directly related to it.
        The proposal for the bipartisan group is being developed as part of the House rules package that will be presented as one of the first orders of business when the new Congress convenes on Jan. 4. Some staff members are scheduled to be briefed on it on Wednesday, and Representative James E. Clyburn of South Carolina, the new No. 3 Democrat, is planning to present it to lawmakers in conference calls on Thursday, officials said.
        Besides the bipartisan group, Democrats are expected to propose a ban on gifts and meals from lobbyists and organizations that employ them; a prohibition on lobbyists and their employers from planning, organizing, requesting, financing, arranging or participating in travel for members or staff; and a bar to the use of official or campaign money to pay for using corporate jets.
        The emerging rules would also require the disclosure of earmarks, the special provisions in bills that lawmakers use to direct dollars to specific projects or favored causes. Lawmakers would also have to certify that any request for such spending is not in their personal financial interest.
        After the recent Congressional scandals, the Republican majority began developing its own major changes in lobbying and ethics rules this year. The package stalled because of divisions over the scope of the proposed new restrictions on contacts with lobbyists and the extent of disclosure.
        Several leading Republicans have suggested since the election that not following through on the rules overhaul was a significant mistake that contributed to the party's losses.
        Mrs. Pelosi and other members of the new leadership, including Representative Rahm Emanuel of Illinois, who ran the party's campaign organization, have indicated that they intend to avoid a similar misstep and have strong party support, particularly from newly elected members.
      