
        Democratic officials moved into the final stage of deliberations yesterday about where to place their party's 2008 nominating convention, with New York officials saying they were increasingly confident that the party would turn to their city for its convention for the first time in 16 years.
        Party officials said the decision -- with New York competing against Denver -- would be made no later than Monday, and perhaps by the end of this week.
        The New York officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity for fear of jeopardizing the negotiations, said their prospects for winning the convention looked good, despite Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's reservations about his ability to raise roughly $85 million to cover the costs.
        Prominent New York Democrats, including Senator Charles E. Schumer and Governor-elect Eliot Spitzer, have been working to promote the bid within the Democratic National Committee.
        Officials working on the bid have contended that New York is better positioned than Denver to deliver the financing, hotel rooms, entertainment space, logistical support and labor union cooperation that are needed for a successful convention. All that the city lacks, the officials agree, is a voter base that has not already made up its mind.
        ''New York has every advantage except that we're a deep blue state,'' Mr. Schumer said in an interview yesterday.
        Denver has undertaken a polished effort to highlight its politically advantageous location in the Rocky Mountain West, now considered a swing area. Bid organizers have made a case to the Democratic leadership that the region, populated by disaffected Republicans and Democrats who are ripe for excitement, could decide the next presidency. The lobbying effort has drawn help from newly empowered Democrats like the incoming Senate majority leader, Harry Reid of Nevada, and Senator-elect Jon Tester of Montana.
        Karen Finney, a spokeswoman for the Democratic National Committee, said, ''We are still in negotiations with both cities, and both are being considered equally.''
        Yet some Democrats in Washington with knowledge of the two bids said that Denver had offered fewer clear assurances than New York that it could raise the necessary money, a crucial factor for the party chairman, Howard Dean. These Democrats said that Mr. Dean was very high on the idea of Denver and its promise as fertile political ground, but that he might conclude that New York had the better bid on paper.
        One interesting wrinkle for New York -- and one that highlights the evolving power dynamics in the state -- is that it is not entirely clear who would command the fund-raising effort here.
        The mayor was a formidable fund-raiser for the Republican convention here in 2004. Yet administration officials expressed ''grave concerns'' in October that Mr. Bloomberg might be spread too thin to raise money for the city's share of convention costs, projected at $80 million to $100 million.
        Both Mr. Spitzer and Mr. Schumer strongly support holding the convention here, yet both have been hesitant to pledge that they will raise the money if Mr. Bloomberg decides he cannot, according to the officials familiar with the negotiations.
        Mr. Spitzer is eager to focus on overhauling New York government and reviving the upstate economy in 2007 and 2008, and not on raising money in his first year as governor, the officials noted. That said, Mr. Spitzer would not mind having a national platform where he could trumpet his work in Albany, they said.
        Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton has also been an advocate for a convention in New York. Yet because she is a possible presidential candidate in 2008 --public opinion polls indicate that she would be the likely front-runner for the Democratic nomination, were she to run -- her team would need to spend the next 18 months raising money for her campaign, not for the convention.
        Nonetheless, others are poised to fill any fund-raising gaps. The former treasury secretary Robert E. Rubin and the business leader and philanthropist Jonathan M. Tisch are the co-chairmen of the bid's host committee, so they and their allies would probably undertake much of the fund-raising.
        In a break from years past, party officials are negotiating agreements with both contending cities before making a selection, in hopes of avoiding the kinds of problems seen in the past. In 2004, for instance, Boston struggled to raise all the money it had promised to the party.
        With many political analysts and elected officials arguing that the Democrats would be wise to take their convention to an area of the country where they might knock a few states over to their side of the fence, New York's chances at the beginning looked dim. But aides to Mr. Bloomberg put together an all-out pitch, with the mayor going to Chicago to court party leaders, taking along the ''Sopranos'' star Lorraine Bracco and offering the officials Big Apple martinis and manhattans.
      