
        Democratic Party officials are delaying their decision about where to hold their 2008 presidential nominating convention, a party spokeswoman said yesterday, as negotiations appeared to hit snags with both competing cities, Denver and New York.
        In recent weeks, the Democrats had promised to make their selection before the end of the year but said it could come sooner. But as a crucial labor union in Denver refused to sign a pledge barring strikes during the convention and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg continued to raise alarms about the cost of being the host in New York, Howard Dean, the party chairman, decided to wait until early January to announce the convention city.
        ''Chairman Dean is going to make the best decision for the party based on the merits of each city's bids,'' said Stacie Paxton, the press secretary of the Democratic National Committee.
        Officials working on the bid have said that New York is better positioned than Denver to deliver the financing, hotel rooms, entertainment space, logistical support and labor union cooperation that are needed for a successful convention. But Denver has been playing up its politically advantageous location in the Rocky Mountain West, considered a swing area.
        Some Democrats in Washington with knowledge of the two bids have said that Denver offered fewer clear assurances than New York that it could raise the necessary money. Although Mr. Dean likes the idea of Denver and its promise of fertile political ground, these Democrats said, he could still conclude that New York had made the better bid.
        But officials in New York have been showing some ambivalence. Even though other politicians and wealthy donors have assured the party that they can fill any fund-raising gaps that arise, Mr. Bloomberg has been distancing himself from such efforts. At a news conference in Queens yesterday, he told reporters that although the city had raised enough money to cover the costs of the Republican convention in 2004, he was ''not sure we could do that again.''
        ''The model where cities would pay for the whole convention this time looks more problematic,'' Mr. Bloomberg said. ''And my problem is I've just got to raise money for the World Trade Center, for some poverty stuff and, you know, the Democrats are looking to see how much money they think they can raise and what a convention will cost.''
        Officials have estimated that they would have to raise $80 million or more to sponsor the convention, and Mr. Bloomberg worried that fund-raising by the three potential presidential candidates from New York, Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Gov. George E. Pataki, would create too much competition for scarce dollars.
        ''That's something that everybody is wrestling with,'' Mr. Bloomberg said. ''How do you, in this day and age, go and pay for these conventions when a lot of people would like to give their money to specific candidate races or candidates rather than to the convention itself.''
        At the same time, the Denver bid encountered its own problems, with the leader of the local stagehands' union refusing to sign an agreement not to strike if the convention came to that city.
        Debbie Willhite, the executive director of the host committee there, said she was confident that they could resolve the issues leading to the refusal, first reported yesterday by The Denver Post, but characterized it as ''a deal-breaker.''
        ''We're optimistic, but we're not foolhardy,'' Ms. Willhite said. ''We believe that it will take a little bit of discussion to get it done.''
        At issue, according to Leslie Moody, the president of the Denver Area Labor Federation, is the Pepsi Center, the privately owned arena where the convention would be held. Although arena officials have agreed to use union labor for the convention, she said, they do not ordinarily use union contractors, an issue the stage workers' union wants to resolve for the long term.
      