
        The Knicks were still fighting last night, for everything that was left after they nearly destroyed their season two nights earlier. There was a little mayhem on the court, but it was purely benign.
        Hours after four teammates were suspended, and two nights after inciting a horrifying brawl on the same court, the Knicks somehow pulled together, kept their heads and fashioned a dramatic 97-96 overtime victory over the Utah Jazz, one of the league's elite teams.
        Punctuating this unlikely storyline was an unlikely savior: Stephon Marbury, who has struggled all season, scored on a driving finger roll at the buzzer, delivering the victory and a rare burst of joy at the Garden. The bodies flying after the buzzer were only the Knicks, bouncing and dancing off the court.
        ''It's a great win for all of us -- our fans and everybody, considering what is going on with our team here at home,'' said Coach Isiah Thomas, who was widely criticized in the wake of Saturday's brawl with the Nuggets.
        The victory was only the Knicks' fifth in 15 home games and bumped them to 10-17 over all. It came against a team, the Jazz (18-7), that has been the N.B.A.'s best through the first month and a half of the season.
        With their roster depleted, their season slipping away and Thomas's job security rapidly deteriorating, the Knicks rallied on all fronts.
        Marbury, showing signs of his old dominant self, had 29 points and 8 assists. David Lee, the Knicks' all-purpose energy source, had 17 points and a career-high 20 rebounds as he filled in for the suspended Jared Jeffries. Jamal Crawford provided his usual late scoring punch and finished with 18 points.
        Deron Williams and Carlos Boozer scored 23 points each for Utah, which squandered an early 16-point lead. Williams nearly delivered the victory, making a 22-footer to give Utah a 96-95 lead with 3 seconds left in overtime.
        The Knicks chose not to call a timeout, and Lee threw a perfect pass to Marbury, who was racing upcourt. Marbury easily got to the rim for the uncontested layup as the buzzer sounded.
        ''When David got the ball, we both had eye contact with each other,'' Marbury said. ''I saw that everybody was back in the front court, so I just took off.''
        It was a bit of redemption for Marbury, who has been booed mercilessly all season and has frequently misfired down the stretch. He missed a free throw that could have iced the game with 53.6 seconds left in overtime. He had a turnover and missed a short runner in the final 93 seconds of regulation.
        ''I was really happy for him, because he's from New York and he understands this city better than any of us,'' Thomas said. ''I was proud of the way he just kept battling.''
        Utah erased a 10-point deficit in the fourth quarter, and Williams hit the game-tying 3-pointer with 10.8 seconds left in regulation. Crawford missed a 3-pointer at the buzzer to force overtime.
        The Knicks played without one starter, Jeffries; and the reserves Nate Robinson, Jerome James and Mardy Collins, all of whom were suspended because of Saturday's brawl. The Knicks were also without the injured guards Steve Francis and Quentin Richardson.
        They were left with only eight players in uniform. When they trailed by 16 in the first quarter, it seemed it was all too much to overcome. But they rallied in the second quarter with stifling defense and a scoring run from Marbury.
        ''I just said to them that the same resistance and fight that you've had in your life, in your own daily journey, trying to get to the N.B.A., whenever you met that resistance in your life, you moved through it,'' Thomas said.
        ''And this is a time where you're meeting resistance and you got to move through that resistance. You can't give in to it.''
        James, a backup center, is eligible to return for tomorrow night's home game against Charlotte. Jeffries, a starting forward, is serving a four-game suspension and can return Dec. 27 against Detroit. Collins, a backup guard, is serving a six-game suspension and is out until the Dec. 31 game at Phoenix, the start of a five-game trip. Robinson, who received the longest suspension, 10 games, cannot return until Jan. 10, a home game against Philadelphia.
        The suspensions will cost Robinson $107,770, Collins $49,084, James $49,090 and Jeffries $47,409.
        ''We're in concurrence with whatever the league has offered up,'' Thomas said before the game, ''and whatever the commissioner said, we support and we'll abide by.''
        REBOUNDS
        Given the Knicks' desperate state, Steve Francis said he would try to return sooner than doctors initially planned. Francis has been slowed by tendinitis in his right knee and was recently instructed to rest for two more weeks -- a period that would extend until late next week. ''I'm going to have to come back sooner,'' Francis said. ''I can't do any worse than what's going on right now. So hopefully I'll be able to help my team.'' Francis said he would try to schedule a doctor's appointment as soon as possible. ... Isiah Thomas declined to fire back at Denver Coach George Karl, who accused Thomas of inciting Saturday's fight. Karl also used two profanities to describe Thomas. Francis fired back on Thomas's behalf, saying of Karl, ''He wouldn't come out and just say that stuff if he knew we were playing them again.'' The Knicks and Nuggets are not scheduled to play again until next season.
        PRO BASKETBALL
      