
        Substantiated cases of misconduct by New York City police officers are increasingly likely to end with the department's most lenient form of discipline when they do not involve physical force or weapons, the city's Civilian Complaint Review Board said yesterday.
        In its midyear report, the board said that ''instructions,'' the least serious form of discipline, were meted out in 75 percent of cases during the first six months of 2006, compared with 37 percent in the same period of 2003. In 2004, 30 percent of cases during that period resulted in ''instructions,'' and in 2005, the percentage was 52. In the second half of 2005, it rose to 73 percent.
        Instructions involve a commander briefing an officer on procedure, and sometimes include retraining.
        Paul J. Browne, the Police Department's chief spokesman, took issue with some of the report's statistics because he said they ''excluded those cases involving improper use of force in which the police commissioner imposed harsher discipline.''
        He said that excluding those complaints, the most serious the board can consider, leads to faulty analysis of the department's disciplinary practices. ''For cases where force is not an issue, instruction is most often the appropriate remedy,'' he said. ''It's something employed after a review of the facts, not simply as a decision to use more frequently, as C.C.R.B. asserted.''
        As for cases involving force, Mr. Browne said, 80 percent resulted in measures beyond instructions during the first half of 2006. Over all, he said, ''discipline has been imposed in more cases than ever before.''
        Andrew Case, a board spokesman, agreed that 80 percent of cases disciplined involving force went beyond instructions, but he said that 95 percent of such cases had been disciplined beyond instructions in 2003.
        Chris Dunn of the New York Civil Liberties Union said that the report showed the department's ''move towards instructions'' and that ''most officers are not facing any real discipline for their misconduct."
        The board also said that the overall number of complaints it received increased to 3,877 in the first half of this year, compared with 3,473 complaints during the same period last year. It also said the latest figure was the greatest for any six-month period in its history.
        It said the city's 311 phone system, instituted in March 2003, was a significant factor, but not the only one.
        Mr. Browne said the board had overlooked ''phantom complaints,'' in which those making them fail to materialize or cooperate with the board after their initial contact.
        Mr. Case said the number of cases it mediated or investigated in the first half of 2006 was 1,644, compared with 1,142 in the first half of 2003.
      