
        For the second time in three nights, the Knicks spent a fourth quarter with their starters on the bench. Only their postures had changed. They slumped forward, hands on chins, ice bags on knees, heads shaking. Eddy Curry chewed his fingernails. Stephon Marbury stared without emotion. Quentin Richardson was not there at all.
        They were not just resting, as they did in the final minutes of Wednesday night's rout of Atlanta. This time, the Knicks were stewing, hurting, dismayed. They took a 112-96 thumping from the Indiana Pacers, and left Conseco Fieldhouse late Friday night with more questions and doubts.
        Marbury spent the final 21 minutes 17 seconds on the bench, and had his left knee wrapped in ice. Richardson spent the final three quarters in the locker room because of back spasms. And the Knicks' one reliably positive story line came to a halt: Curry scored 10 points, ending an 11-game streak of 20-point performances.
        Marbury said the knee was sore but not seriously injured and that he intended to play Saturday against the Denver Nuggets. Richardson's status was unclear. He left before reporters entered the locker room. A team spokesman said he would be re-evaluated Saturday.
        Thus continued the Knicks' wobbly pattern of following each victory with a loss, and chasing good news with bad. Jared Jeffries had just returned to the lineup, and Channing Frye is nearly healthy. But Richardson is questionable, and Steve Francis is at least two weeks away from returning.
        ''It's crazy,'' said Marbury, who had 6 points and an assist in 24 minutes.
        The game was lost in the second quarter, with Richardson already gone and with Curry and Jeffries in foul trouble. The Pacers scored 42 points in the period, with Danny Granger accounting for 15.
        ''We just caved,'' Knicks Coach Isiah Thomas said. ''They made a run at us and they had things going their way. And we just came unglued.''
        The fight and resiliency that Thomas had praised in his team was nowhere in evidence. But then, neither were their best players. In Richardson, the Knicks (9-16) were missing an important defender and perimeter shooter. And Curry was handcuffed by the nagging defense of Jeff Foster and Jermaine O'Neal, and by frequent double teams.
        Curry was held to just six field-goal attempts in 27 minutes. He also had five turnovers and just three rebounds. It was his worst performance since Nov. 20, when he scored 8 points in a loss to Houston.
        ''I just had a bad game,'' Curry said. ''They played great defense on me. My hat goes off to Foster and Jermaine O'Neal. They played great 'D' tonight.''
        Curry said the rough treatment in the post was nothing new. But after his three-week scoring binge and talk of an All-Star selection, Curry is becoming a marked man. Thomas said the Knicks missed Richardson's ability to stretch the defense, and said they lacked the patience to consistently work the ball inside. But he said Curry also needed to adjust to the attention.
        ''It's going to be a growing experience for him, because everybody's just going to start playing rough with him,'' Thomas said. ''We depend on the officials to eliminate the rough play, but people are just going to grab him and hold him, because if they don't do that, they won't be able to stop him.''
        Jamal Crawford led the Knicks with 29 points, but he and Marbury were benched early in the third quarter. The Knicks had just fallen behind by 20 points. Crawford eventually returned. But Thomas held out Marbury, who had banged his knee in the second quarter, saying it was not worth risking further injury.
        Marbury said Thomas took him and Crawford out because they were not playing defense.
        The lapses were teamwide. Al Harrington (17 points) and Granger (25) got loose for six 3-pointers between them. The Pacers made 12 of 23 shots from behind the 3-point arc. At their low point, the Knicks allowed Stephen Jackson to make an 80-foot pass to Harrington, who had slipped behind Curry, Jeffries and David Lee and dunked with no one near him.
        ''That's just mental focus,'' Jeffries said. ''That's on me and you can't have those kind of games. Our biggest thing right now is our concentration level. When we don't concentrate, we don't focus, we don't have enough to come back from mental lapses like that.''
        Thomas, who played at Indiana University and previously coached the Pacers, made his third homecoming stop in the last three weeks, after games in Chicago (where he grew up) and Detroit (where he won two N.B.A. championships). His team has ruined the sentimental journeys, going 0-3.
        REBOUNDS
        Channing Frye will be re-evaluated Saturday and might be cleared to play against Denver.  Eddy Curry was the top-scoring center in the Eastern Conference heading into the game, but not in the top 10 in All-Star balloting. ''I think the coaches and the players in the league, they recognize what he's doing and where he's at,'' Isiah Thomas said.
        PRO BASKETBALL
      