
        In a final step toward concentrating on its Bell Canada telephone business, BCE Inc. said on Monday that it would sell its Telesat Canada satellite communications division to Loral Space and Communications and a Canadian pension fund.
        The sale price of 3.25 billion Canadian dollars ($2.8 billion) was about 600 million to 1 billion Canadian dollars more than analysts' estimates.
        ''Bell came out of this with a big, big valuation upside,'' said Dvai Ghose, a telecommunications analyst in Toronto with Genuity Capital.
        The Telesat sale represents the end of a long process by BCE, which is based in Montreal, to withdraw from a diversification program it embraced early in the decade. About a year ago, the company also sold its controlling stake in Bell Globemedia, a company that includes Canada's largest private television broadcaster, CTV, as well as The Globe and Mail newspaper in Toronto.
        The higher-than-expected price for Telesat will also help offset recent turmoil for BCE's share price brought on by a change in Canada's tax laws. In October, BCE said it would become an income trust, a corporate structure that would allow it to avoid most taxes by paying out the bulk of its income directly to shareholders.
        The prospect of Canada's largest telecommunications company becoming a trust, however, was too much for the federal government. It announced rules that effectively block new conversions and that limit the life span of current income trusts.
        Last week, BCE, unsurprisingly, abandoned its conversion plans. It will eliminate the BCE holding company structure and adopt Bell Canada's name for all the company's operations.
        The participation of the Public Sector Pension Investment Board in the deal appears partly intended to circumvent Canadian rules banning foreign control of satellite services and telecommunications ventures. The board manages funds for federal public servants and members of the military.
        While Loral, based in New York, will own 64 percent of Telesat's total equity, the pension fund, along with some minority Canadian shareholders, will own 66.7 percent of the company's voting shares. Mr. Ghose said he expected Loral to take full voting control of the company if Canada changed its ownership rules. The current Conservative government has hinted that such changes are coming.
        Telesat, which was once owned by the federal government and launched the world's first domestic commercial communications satellite in 1972, will remain based in Ottawa. Loral plans to transfer 4 of its Telstar satellites to give Telesat a total of 11; Telesat operates another 7 satellites for customers. It will also control four others that are scheduled to become operational over the next three years. That will make Telesat the fourth-largest satellite service provider in the world, based on the number of satellites it controls.
      