
        It will be at least 127 days before Isiah Thomas's fate with the Knicks is decided, and his boss will apparently spend that time looking for reasons to keep Thomas, rather than reasons to fire him.
        James L. Dolan, the Madison Square Garden chairman, reiterated Tuesday that Thomas had the entire season to prove he should keep his twin posts as coach and president. In June, Dolan ordered Thomas to coach the team, and he gave him a one-year ultimatum to show ''evident progress.''
        Speaking publicly for the first time since then, Dolan again declined to set any benchmarks, like a specific victory total or a playoff berth. But during a 35-minute session with reporters, Dolan sounded reluctant to fire Thomas. In fact, he repeatedly expressed faith in Thomas, despite the Knicks' 8-15 record and the thousands of empty seats at the Garden.
        ''You also have to take into account what the alternative is,'' Dolan said of replacing Thomas. ''Because if what you're saying is that we haven't made enough progress and that's really true, then what you're saying is that we have to restart again. That would essentially mean blowing up this organization in terms of who's working here, bringing in a new philosophy of play with a new coach. That's pretty drastic.''
        Dolan repeated in various ways that he was not interested in another overhaul of the team if he could avoid it, and he said at one point, ''You have to look at the 'start all over again' not as a positive.''
        But in pointing to the Knicks' performance and not their record so far this season, Dolan said, ''If we end up this season where we are now, in terms of the development, I think we would all be disappointed.''
        Dispelling any doubts, he also said that Thomas ''absolutely'' had the entire season to show progress. So Thomas will apparently receive every benefit of the doubt between now and April 18.
        Despite the poor record, the regular chorus of boos at the Garden and the occasional ''Fire Thomas!'' chants, Dolan said, ''I think we're on the right track.''
        He cited the emergence of center Eddy Curry and the development of some of the Knicks' young players.
        Although the record does not reflect it, the Knicks have played with considerably more passion and unity than they did under Coach Larry Brown last season, when they finished 23-59.
        They have been resilient, often rallying from double-digit deficits, and they have adjusted well to a Curry-driven offense.
        ''You're seeing a team with spirit, wants to play together, wants to win,'' Dolan said. ''They're not all scratching their heads about what's being asked of them.''
        He added: ''I believe that this could be the team that could ultimately compete for a championship. Probably with more changes over time, and I'm certainly not suggesting it's going to happen this year, but you see a lot of very promising aspects to the team.''
        As optimistic as he sounded, Dolan said it was ''just too early'' to say whether the Knicks were showing sufficient progress, or to know what to make of Curry's newfound dominance. (He has scored at least 20 points in 10 straight games.)
        ''Is this really progress, or is this an aberration?'' Dolan said rhetorically. ''Your final conclusion has to be, it's just too early.''
        The Knicks' 97-90 loss to the Boston Celtics on Monday was typical of their season so far. They trailed by 30 points in the third quarter but somehow knocked the deficit down to 3 points by the final minute of play and had a chance to win.
        They have had many such games, making it difficult to gauge their progress. Dolan said the Knicks' struggles were not unexpected, given how young the roster is.
        Two of last season's rookies -- David Lee and Channing Frye -- have split time as the starting power forward, and two other recent picks, Nate Robinson and Renaldo Balkman, have played major roles off the bench.
        Thomas was hired three years ago to be the Knicks' chief architect. He has made dozens of roster moves, acquiring high-priced talent that for a time generated excitement but failed to produce victories. The team is 93-148 since Thomas arrived. Dolan remains stridently supportive.
        ''I believe that Isiah will be successful,'' he said. ''I believe that he is going to take this team and that he is going to develop it significantly over this season. I believe that we will be sitting here at the end of the season saying, 'Obviously, we need to keep Isiah.' I believe that, but I'm not committed to that.''
        While the team has struggled, attendance has plummeted. The Knicks have failed to sell out 10 of their 12 home games, and a dozen luxury suites are empty most games. Dolan said he was concerned about the plummeting attendance, but he said it had no impact on Thomas's job security.
        ''You have to let the team develop,'' he said. ''You can't say, 'Oh, I got empty seats, I'm going to change the team.' It just doesn't work that way.''
        The Knicks have already had their share of upheaval over the past three years. Thomas is the fifth coach in that span, following Don Chaney, Lenny Wilkens, Herb Williams and Brown.
        The Knicks won just 23 games in Brown's only season, and Dolan fired him for a long list of alleged offenses, including insubordination. The Knicks initially withheld the $40 million owed to Brown, but they paid him $18.5 million in a settlement last month.
        ''I'm sorry about last season and about what happened with our coach,'' he said, clarifying that the apology was to the fans and not to Brown. ''I'm sorry we made a mistake hiring that coach.''
        Dolan referred to Brown's tenure as a setback for the organization, specifically the Knicks' young players. Brown used 42 starting lineups and alienated most of the players. He never gave consistent roles to Curry and Lee, who have become two of the Knicks' best players this season.
        ''We had good young players; they could have been developing, we could be farther along today than we are now,'' Dolan said. ''And that's my fault. I feel bad about that. But I can't go back and change it. All I can do is keep moving forward.''
        PRO BASKETBALL
      