
        There are only so many holiday jokes to go around, and after years of holiday-ing they're getting pretty threadbare. So what a pleasant surprise -- better than pleasant, really; downright awe-inspiring -- when the most beaten-up seasonal punching bag of them all, the fruitcake, turns up as the daffy crowning touch in ''That Time of the Year,'' a musical revue getting an amusing staging by the York Theater Company.
        Such defying of expectations occurs more than once in this pleasant, stress-free show, whose concept and lyrics are by Laurence Holzman and Felicia Needleman, with music by seven different composers. You know going in that you'll hear all of the expected stuff: laments about family get-togethers and holiday parties, send-ups of shopping, something about weight-gaining, self-deprecating Hanukkah bits. Surprisingly often, when they come around, they sparkle even though you're expecting them.
        The guy (Nick Verina) dressed up as a giant dreidel, for instance, is hysterical delivering a song called ''Time for a Spin.'' So is the slutty Mrs. Claus (Kerri Jill Garbis) trying to get Santa to stay home for the night. But nobody is funnier than the three singing fruitcakes (Ms. Garbis, Erin Maguire and Bridget Beirne) doing a sort of doo-wop number, the choreography all in their bobbing and turning heads. (''Everybody loves to eat fruit,'' they sing. ''Everybody loves to eat cake. So why is putting them together such a horrible mistake?'')
        None of the five cast members have knockout voices, but there is a standout, Jonathan Rayson, who demonstrates admirable versatility. He perfectly establishes the approach of the show -- it gives equal time to Christian and Jewish traditions -- with a very funny song called ''Angelo Rosenbaum'' (he doesn't know whether to marry a Catholic girl or a Jewish one), then later delivers a nice ballad called ''You're the Reason Why'' that is the lineup's best shot at becoming a holiday standard.
        Weak spots? With two dozen or so songs, sure. An attempt to wring surprise out of the tired old double meaning of ''coming out'' doesn't work, the Hanukkah story is told once too often, and the ''Calypso Christmas'' that opens the second act, looking like a ripoff of the ''Benjamin Calypso'' from ''Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat,'' is just embarrassing. But you'll leave feeling reasonably full of good cheer anyway.
        ''That Time of the Year'' continues through Dec. 24 at the Theater at St. Peter's, 619 Lexington Avenue, at 54th Street; (212) 935-5820.
        THEATER REVIEW
      