
        The View From Castle Rock  By Alice Munro  349 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.95.
        Alice Munro is a short-story writer of unsurpassable distinctions. Does the word seem tight or fussy? Think of the original distinctions, the two in Genesis: separating light from darkness, the land from the waters.
        The distinctions that Ms. Munro has been elaborating for years along the prairies, small towns and modest lives of Canada operate upon the heart. They are particle metaphysics, and their collisions release an energy that all but mutates the reader's mental and emotional genes. Afterward we glow faintly in the dark.
        Heart is a word dangerously subject to sentimental abuse; even worse is heartstrings. Useful, though, in attempting to suggest the nature of Ms.Munro's art. She moves on a fine workaday surface; then, unsignaled, reaches deep with delicate and knowing fingers to tug the filament of a brainily targeted emotion. Her unremarkable landscapes are dotted with rabbit holes; falling in, we grow, we shrink, we are at a loss, and then unexpectedly found.
        Now, after some dozen volumes of short stories, comes ''The View From Castle Rock.'' Its chain of episodes is based on letters, journals and research spanning seven generations of the Laidlaws -- one side of her family -- from the late 17th century in the Scottish Lowlands to the Canadian present.
        A change, then, from fiction. Or is it? She must be quoted, partly because to quote the aristocratic spontaneity of Alice Munro's prose is better than describing it; and partly because her foreword displays the elusive play of her distinctions.
        She had always kept these pieces separate from her fiction. ''In other first-person stories I had drawn on personal material, but then I did anything I wanted to with this material. Because the chief thing I was doing was making a story.''
        Here, ''I put myself in the center and wrote about that self, as searchingly as I could. But the figures around this self took on their own life and color and did things they had not done in reality.'' She adds: ''You could say that such stories pay more attention to the truth of a life than fiction usually does. But not enough to swear on.''
        The reader will not swear but will suspect. In the finest among these fictions (fact-ions?), as transporting as anything she's written, we bump along for a while with the memoir material. Comes a puff, a lift. We are skimming buoyantly in the Munro balloon. Then back down to the real: the real, touched by traces of story, the way dream-shreds drift a moment around the morning toothbrush.
        Take the splendid title piece. Old James Laidlaw, several grown children and a grandchild or two are packed into the colorfully told cramp of an immigrant ship bound for Canada. Old James looks back to the ghost and fairy-ridden stories of his grandfather; his children are pulled between past and future. Nettie, the fey, ailing teenage daughter of a rich wine merchant, attaches herself to Walter, the most practical of the sons. There is a quicksilver sliver of romance; her father offers Walter a job in Montreal. He declines and stays with his family.
        The last section gives gritty journal and letter accounts of the backbreaking new life. And for Walter, who will make his arduous way, ''years will pass'' before Nettie ''will reappear in his mind. But when she does, he will find that she is a source of happiness, available to him till the day he dies.''
        ''Illinois,'' a decade or two later, tells of Andrew, another brother, coming down from Canada, where he is a prospering farmer, to fetch his widowed sister-in-law Mary from Joliet, Ill. The grueling oxcart ride, the roads, the inns, seem fact-based. The author makes fictional (I think) sorties: an Indian servant who may or may not be following them; a teenage son, furious at leaving Illinois, who hides Mary's baby so they will turn back; two girls mischievously placing it in the stable boy's bed with a thank-you note from ''your sweethearts.''
        Other stories move toward the present. One tells of the author's failed first love; another, of the chill snobbery of a family she works for as an au pair. These are merely good, lacking the aching sweep of time, the uncovering of successive sedimentary layers found in some of the others. Ms. Munro is a geologist of human lives, hopes and fates.
        There is an account, cool -- and heartbreaking because of it -- of Ms. Munro's hard-working father. He breeds silver foxes, prospers briefly as her mother fashions them into scarves for tourists, only to fall back into bare struggle when the war halts the visitor trade; and his wife turns invalid. It is a pavane of circling hope, failure and resignation. He recalls being caught in a blizzard and thinking of death and his unfulfilled duties and responsibilities to those left behind.
        '' 'Was that all you thought about?' I said when he told me this.'' Ms. Munro continues: ''Didn't he think of himself, of the boy who had trapped along the Blyth Creek didn't he struggle for his own self? I meant, was his life now something only other people had a use for?''
        It was. But later, because Ms. Munro's fates continue to circle, he remarries and begins happily to write. A memoir first, so this memoir-fiction tells us, and then a novel.
        BOOKS OF THE TIMES
      