
        Dubai's giant port company, DP World, sold its United States holdings on Monday to the American International Group, bringing to an end a contentious deal that left a bitter taste for Middle East investors.
        Under pressure from politicians, DP World is selling terminal operations in six ports, including New York-New Jersey and Philadelphia, cargo-handling businesses in 16 Eastern and Gulf of Mexico ports, and a passenger terminal in New York City to a unit of A.I.G., an insurance company with little experience in the port business.
        The price was not disclosed, though DP World said it was ''fair.'' DP World executives said after they agreed to sell the assets in March that they expected to get about $750 million from the sale. Since then port deals have become increasingly popular for bank infrastructure funds, like that of Goldman Sachs, which headed a group that won control of AB Ports, a British company, in June.
        The DP World sale is the final chapter in a politically charged deal that many financial advisers say helped drive Middle East petrodollars away from the United States and into developing market areas like Asia instead.
        DP World, which is controlled by the Dubai government, acquired the United States ports in its $6.8 billion acquisition of Peninsular and Oriental Holdings, a British company, in February. The deal was quickly opposed by United States politicians from both parties, who claimed that Dubai's ownership of United States assets was a threat to security and that the deal was being rushed through without proper review.
        Their objections were based in part on the fact that several of the Sept. 11, 2001, hijackers moved through the United Arab Emirates before coming to the United States and used its banking system. Supporters of the deal argued that Dubai was one of the United States' closest allies in the Middle East, and had a long history of allowing the United States military to use its ports. Foreign policy specialists worried that the opposition would cause a rift between Dubai and the United States.
        DP World's chief executive, Mohammed Sharaf, said that the uproar over the deal had not done permanent damage to relations between the United States and Dubai. The two countries' leaders are ''much more responsible people'' than that, he said.
        He acknowledged that because of the reception to the DP World deal, some Middle East investors were looking outside of the United States for places to put their money. ''As time passes, that will change,'' Mr. Sharaf said, unless United States authorities enact more protectionist measures against deals involving Middle East investors.
        Senator Charles E. Schumer, the New York Democrat who led opposition to DP World's takeover of Peninsular and Oriental, said in a statement that Monday's sale represented ''an appropriate final chapter'' to the DP World deal and that he expected it to receive broad support in Washington.
        ''The economic relationship between Dubai and America has not been hurt by this,'' Senator Schumer said in a telephone interview. He said the deal was ''mishandled from the get-go.''
        A.I.G.'s asset management unit, the AIG Global Investment Group, will take control of the port operations. The ports' current management, led by its chairman, Michael Seymour, will remain. AIG Global Investment's managing director, Christopher Lee, said that A.I.G. had ''identified the marine terminals sector as a key element in our infrastructure investment strategy.''
        Senator Schumer said that A.I.G.'s asset management unit might not have much port experience, but it ''has good experience running companies.''
        DP World is planning to grow in North America, South America, the Middle East and Europe, Mr. Sharaf said.
      