
        With each new martial-arts drama, the Chinese director Zhang Yimou widens the distance between his adult self and his dismal youth during the Cultural Revolution, pushing himself to ever greater heights of ambition and experimentation. Energy and excess -- of color, symbolism and emotion -- are his antidotes to memories of uniformity and repression. His extravagant stories celebrate unfettered artistic expression as if it were a gift his Western counterparts have long taken for granted.
        In ''Curse of the Golden Flower'' Mr. Zhang achieves a kind of operatic delirium, opening the floodgates of image and melodrama until the line between tragedy and black comedy is all but erased. Set in A.D. 928 during the late Tang dynasty, the movie wallows in the rotting marriage of a cruel emperor (Chow Yun-Fat) and his secretive wife (Gong Li), a union so corrupt that each is plotting the other's annihilation.
        The emperor, with the help of the royal physician and a rare fungus, is slowly destroying his wife's sanity. Because palace protocol forbids her to refuse the ''medicine,'' the empress retaliates by planning a bloody coup during the coming chrysanthemum festival, persuading the most biddable of her three sons (Jay Chou) to join her revolt.
        By this point most directors would have their hands full, but Mr. Zhang piles on the intrigue, adding a forbidden love affair, a vengeful first wife and two varieties of incest. His actors respond in kind, straining their facial muscles with silent-movie enthusiasm and doing everything but shooting flames from their eye sockets.
        Matching them is a production design (by Huo Tingxiao, channeling Liberace) that brilliantly conveys the oppressiveness of opulence. As the empress moves through the palace's endless corridors, her upper body at once compressed by and overflowing from her bodice and her face covered in poisonous beads of sweat, we can almost feel the weight of her brocade gown and pendulous hair ornaments. Not the most useful ensemble for a wife intent on fleeing her husband.
        Bathed in thick, primary colors and Shigeru Umebayashi's thumping score, ''Curse of the Golden Flower'' is more lurid and less romantic than Mr. Zhang's previous martial-arts drama, the swooning ''House of Flying Daggers,'' but its path to destruction is paved with visual gold. The climactic coup, staged with competing armies advancing in waves of black and gold across a field of millions of bright yellow blossoms, may be computer enhanced but is nonetheless breathtaking. Parked in the clouds, the camera gazes down on a forest of lances bisected by the massive palace walls; the screech of metal on metal sears the ears.
        But the movie's most thrilling sequences belong to the silent, black-robed, assassins who attack by swinging from wires like malevolent spiders. In formation no less.
        As the emperor, and the film's seething fulcrum, Mr. Chow, the action star, delivers a performance of amazing intensity, focusing his considerable energy inward to suggest a volcano primed to erupt. His pairing with the incomparable Ms. Gong is no less than inspired. Locked in a tug of war for control of their offspring, the couple provide the film with a core of marital toxicity that's almost nonverbal and deliciously unstable. Whenever the empress is not openly making cow eyes at her weak-willed stepson (Liu Ye), she's sneaking more venom into a glance at her husband than he is sneaking into her bloodstream.
        Though embroiled in familiar themes of fraternal rivalry and Freudian jealousy, Mr. Zhang is aware of the ridiculousness of man's passions in the face of his impermanence. One of the film's loveliest and most allusive sequences focuses on the royal cleanup crew as it restores order after the bloodbath, rinsing away gore and burying stains beneath a fresh carpet of golden chrysanthemums. In the wake of this shadow army, the battle is erased and the dead are swept aside like so many dust bunnies.
        Since his debut in 1987 with ''Red Sorghum'' Mr. Zhang has made more controlled films but never one that's more fun. With ''Curse of the Golden Flower'' he aims for Shakespeare and winds up with Jacqueline Susann. And a good thing too.
        ''Curse of the Golden Flower'' is rated R (Under 17 requires an accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has flying assassins, bloody battles and a mother who, like, really loves her sons.
        Curse of the Golden Flower
        Opens today in New York. Opens tomorrow in Los Angeles, San Francisco, San Diego, Seattle, Honolulu, Boston, Chicago, Washington, Dallas, Houston, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Toronto and Vancouver, and nationwide on Jan. 12.
        Directed by Zhang Yimou; written (in Mandarin, with English subtitles) by Mr. Zhang, Wu Nan and Bian Zhihong; based on a play by Cao Yu; action director, Tony Ching Siu-Tung; director of photography, Zhao Xiaoding; edited by Cheng Long; music by Shigeru Umebayashi; production designer, Huo Tingxiao; produced by Bill Kong and Zhang Weiping; released by Sony Pictures Classics. Running time: 114 minutes.
        WITH: Chow Yun-Fat (the emperor), Gong Li (the empress), Jay Chou (Prince Jai), Liu Ye (Crown Prince Wan), Chen Jin (imperial doctor's wife), Ni Dahong (imperial doctor), Li Man (Chan) and Qin Junjie (Prince Yu).
        FILM REVIEW
      