
        Overcoming adversity has been perhaps the Eagles' most impressive trait this season. Philadelphia has resourcefully remained in playoff contention heading into Sunday's pivotal game at the Meadowlands against the Giants, with both teams at 7-6.
        It is hard to pinpoint the Eagles' low point this season, because there have been several. On Oct. 15, against New Orleans, they lost on the final play as the Saints drove for 8 minutes 26 seconds before kicking the decisive field goal.
        The next week, against Tampa Bay, the Eagles lost on the final play again, when Matt Bryant kicked a 62-yard field goal, a yard short of equaling the longest in league history.
        Many believed the Eagles would fade out of contention after quarterback Donovan McNabb had a season-ending knee injury Nov. 19 during a loss to Tennessee.
        But since losing to the Indianapolis Colts in the first start by McNabb's replacement, Jeff Garcia, the Eagles have won two consecutive games, and they believe Garcia gives them a chance to make the playoffs.
        ''It was important to have a backup who can go out and win games,'' Eagles Coach Andy Reid said.
        For Garcia, it was important to be with a team that could win games. After enduring losing seasons with Cleveland (2004) and Detroit (2005), Garcia saw Philadelphia as an attractive place to sign as a free agent.
        ''They were difficult times,'' Garcia said, referring to his experiences with the Browns and the Lions. ''It seemed to be climbing an uphill battle, week in and week out. Eventually that can break you down. This has definitely been a breath of fresh air to be in a place where I feel like you can compete on a weekly basis, where you are preparing in a way that gives you a chance to win.''
        While Garcia has helped steady the offense, Philadelphia's defense has remained inconsistent. Nobody needs to remind the Eagles what transpired Sept. 17, the last time they faced the Giants. The Eagles took a 24-7 lead into the fourth quarter. They still led, by 10, with four minutes left. But the Giants, scoring the final 23 points, roared back for a 30-24 overtime victory that remains a sore subject with the Eagles.
        ''It was an emotional letdown in a lot of ways,'' Garcia said. '' This team was able to eventually get over it. We had to. We had no choice.''
        The first game against the Giants was further evidence that the Eagles no longer possessed the dominant defense they had from 2001 to 2004, when they advanced to four consecutive National Football Conference championship games.
        Philadelphia enters Sunday's rematch ranked 17th among the league's 32 teams in overall defense, and 29th against the run, yielding 142.5 yards rushing a game. In four of the Eagles' last six games, they have surrendered more than 200 yards rushing.
        Giants running back Tiki Barber has been the main topic of discussion during the Eagles' defensive meetings this week. A huge game by Barber on Sunday is likely to mean a miserable game for the Eagles. Barber rushed for just 51 yards in September against Philadelphia, but that statistic is somewhat misleading, because the Giants relied on their passing game once they fell 17 points behind.
        ''We think he's about 60 percent of their offense, so we start with Tiki,'' Eagles offensive coordinator Jim Johnson said. ''We've stopped him, we've stopped him, we've stopped him, and all of a sudden he breaks a big one. That's what you've got to watch with him. Even though you think you're doing a good job against him, he's capable of making a big play.''
        The Eagles blitz as often as any team in the league, hoping to pressure quarterbacks into mistakes. Philadelphia had two interceptions in last Sunday's 21-19 victory over Washington, including one Michael Lewis returned 84 yards for a touchdown.
        Opportunistic plays like that have kept Philadelphia in contention longer than many people expected. During the seasons when they were winning division championships, the Eagles were consistent. This year, they have settled for being resilient.
        ''We have a lot of fighters in here,'' Eagles safety Brian Dawkins said. ''It is an exciting time of the year. Guys won't need anything to get them pumped up this week.''
        PRO FOOTBALL
      