
        Egypt on Thursday arrested several leading members of the Muslim Brotherhood, the banned but powerful opposition group, and more than 140 student members after a campus protest. The government said the group had formed what amounted to militant squads that planned ''acts of unrest.''
        The arrests followed a demonstration at Al Azhar University in which dozens of students, some in militant-type clothing with black masks, paraded through the campus while performing what looked liked martial exercises.
        In a statement, Interior Ministry officials charged that the brotherhood had created what it called ''deterrence committees,'' which were ''trained in the arts of combat and provided with knives, sticks and chains, and appointed to start holding strikes and demonstrations and acts of unrest in the university.''
        The Muslim Brotherhood, the largest and most organized opposition force in Egypt, has a violent history and was banned after trying to assassinate Gamal Abdel Nasser when he was the prime minister. But the brotherhood disavowed violence in the 1970s and has instead tried to spread its influence through politics and by creating an extensive network of social services.
        It has been tolerated, even while many of its leaders and members are often jailed, as part of a cold peace between the brotherhood and the government.
        Candidates allied with the brotherhood did well in the parliamentary elections last year, weakening the governing party's monopoly on power.
        But the sight of brotherhood members parading in costumes that resembled the militant attire of the Palestinian group Hamas apparently crossed a red line. The students immediately apologized, and brotherhood leaders said it was a mistake, but the arrests were ordered anyway, and included the detention of one of the group's top officials.
        ''What happened was peculiar and wrong, and the students apologized, and the apology should have been accepted,'' said Essam el-Erian, a leading member of the group.
        The Azhar students were protesting because they had been barred from offering their own slate in student government elections.
      