
        THINGS came up this fall and I wasn't paying a lot of attention to my miles. To my chagrin, my latest statement shows that I've flown a mere 29,143 miles on my regular airline so far in 2006.
        For years, I had maintained the highest frequent-flier level on Continental, Platinum Elite, which requires you to fly at least 75,000 miles in a year. Then in 2006, I dropped down to Gold, 50,000 miles. Now I'm barely above the 25,000 mile mark for lowly Silver for 2007.
        The main benefit of the midlevel and top-level elite status is free upgrades to first class -- and at Gold this year I was still upgraded enough times to want to maintain at least that level for 2007. Gold is now out of the question. I have one scheduled trip left this year, Newark to Tucson and back, 4,468 miles total. So that makes 33,611 miles for 2006 -- 16,389 short.
        Some people who find themselves short of miles for an elite-status level near the end of the year still consider making one big grab for extra miles with a mileage run, though experts say their numbers are diminishing.
        A mileage run is a trip booked to accumulate a large number of miles, usually without regard to destination, at the cheapest possible fare.
        This time last year, for example, I was planning an amazing three-day, two-night mileage run with nine connections, including two connections through Guam. It would have yielded slightly over 21,000 miles -- enough to achieve Platinum for 2006 -- at a total fare of $703, plus a $34 fee to a Web site called Elitehelper.com, which does custom mileage-run bookings.
        But I had to beat a retreat from that plan when my wife informed me that only a lunatic would do such a thing -- two connections in Guam? -- two weeks before Christmas.
        Ruling out a mileage run this year, I nevertheless called the proprietor of the Web site, a young man who uses an alias, Viajero Joven (Young Traveler), because he fears airlines may blackball him.
        Most year-end mileage runners are looking for perhaps 5,000 miles to hit a higher level, he said. But some are a lot more desperate. ''Some people want to do over 50,000 miles, which is not possible in a single trip because of the size of the planet,'' he said. ''So they do multiple trips, consecutively.''
        Airlines used to have ironclad rules that only miles actually flown counted toward elite status -- not all those miles earned through, say, credit card purchases. This year, though, US Airways has a promotion in which all miles, even those earned through third-party purchases, count toward elite status. United Airlines earlier offered double elite qualifying miles to anyone for a flat fee of $499.
        One result is that there is now less incentive to do year-end mileage runs for elite status.
        ''Elite qualification isn't what it used to be,'' said Randy Peterson, who publishes the Web site InsideFlyer.com and is considered to be the top expert on frequent-flier programs.
        Now there is more emphasis on planning strategic mileage runs throughout the year simply to accumulate fungible miles -- including those earned through purchases and bonus promotions, which usually far exceed those earned by actual flying.
        ''More people are racking up a large number of miles, not just elite-qualification miles'' for free airline tickets and upgrades to first and business class, he said, and those are available to anyone who can collect enough miles.
        The lure of accumulating bushels-full of miles that can be spent freely on award perks without worrying about actually having to fly elite-status miles has brought ''a whole different generation of people into the game,'' he said.
        Airlines have cut capacity and shifted more routes onto regional jets without first-class seats, meaning fewer elite-status upgrades are available, said Tim Winship, the publisher of Frequentflier.com. ''This year, I sense less enthusiasm for people working to upgrade from a lower tier to a higher tier,'' he said. ''The incentive to go on mileage runs for elite status is diminished.''
        Joel Ann Rea, a frequent worldwide business traveler who is creative director for Sheila Donnelly Associates public relations company, said that she needed only 500 miles at this time last year to qualify for Gold status. Even the shortest trip, say to Washington from her home in the New York suburbs, yields a minimum of 500 miles and can be done in a few hours. Still, she decided it simply wasn't worth it.
        ''I thought, it's the middle of December and I'm simply not getting on another airplane, not for one more level of status,'' she said. ''I was ready to be home and have a nice holiday, and I did.''
        ON THE ROAD
      