
        The game had all the ingredients for a classic hockey punch-up, an intense division rivalry, a national television broadcast in Canada and two heavyweight enforcers. But the Ottawa Senators' 3-1 victory against the Buffalo Sabres on Saturday night turned out to be relatively tame.
        That is the way it has been in the N.H.L. since play resumed after a lockout that wiped out the 2004-5 season. Scoring has increased. Fighting has dropped drastically.
        Last season, major penalties for fighting fell 41 percent compared with 2003-4, the season before the lockout, according to the Elias Sports Bureau. Although fighting majors have increased 12 percent this season, they remain well below prelockout levels.
        ''In the past 8 to 10 years, fighting has almost disappeared,'' said Colin Campbell, the N.H.L.'s director for hockey operations. ''We have less than one per game.''
        With so few fights, the need for enforcers -- the fistic specialists in the N.H.L. -- would appear to be in jeopardy.
        ''That day of just the fighter guy is gone,'' said Rob Ray, a fearsome enforcer who amassed 3,207 penalty minutes during a 15-year career with the Sabres and the Senators before he retired after the 2004-5 season. ''There's a couple who are just hanging on, who will be gone this year or in the near future.''
        Some teams have already dispatched their enforcers. The Stanley Cup champion Carolina Hurricanes have played without a heavyweight for two seasons. And Coach Peter Laviolette has discouraged his players from fighting.
        The Florida Panthers have no enforcers, either. ''We feel we have some tough players, but we don't have that role right now,'' Coach Jacques Martin said. ''The days of guys just being able to fight aren't as predominant.''
        There is no consensus why fighting has waned, but a few factors crop up during discussions of the issue: A collective-bargaining agreement between the N.H.L. and the players association that ended the lockout resulted in a salary cap, so some teams cannot afford to pay a player who does little more than throw punches. The N.H.L. has also emphasized enforcing the rules to stress speed and skill. Slow-footed fighters have become a liability and must improve their skating or find another career.
        Left wing Andrew Peters, the Sabres 6-foot-4, 225-pound enforcer, learned last season that a blistering right hand was no match for fast footwork.
        Peters, 26, made the Sabres roster in 2003-4 as one of the team's two enforcers. Last season, as Buffalo's only enforcer, he dressed for only 28 games. After the season, he met with Coach Lindy Ruff to discuss ways to earn more playing time.
        ''He said, 'We need you to get faster,' so I worked out with our strength coach all summer and lost 24 pounds,'' Peters said. ''I feel great, even though I'm not getting any points. I feel like I can keep up better now.''
        Ruff said, ''He increased his ability to be a more effective player on the offensive side of it, and I think his quickness has allowed him to be a more effective hitter.''
        As a result, Peters has played more often. If he is in the lineup Tuesday against Montreal, it would be his 28th game of the season, matching his total from last season.
        But Peters's contributions to the Sabres (24-6-2), the Eastern Conference leaders, remain modest.
        He has no points and 50 penalty minutes. Against Ottawa, he played 3 minutes 24 seconds, mirroring his team-low average, 3:56. His only memorable play came in the first period when he leveled Senators forward Dany Heatley with a check.
        Still, Peters played. His counterpart on Ottawa, Brian McGrattan, dressed for the game but did not play. In 26 games this season, McGrattan, a 6-6, 230-pound right wing, has an assist and 58 penalty minutes. He has played an average of 3:37 a game, a team low.
        But as a rookie last season, McGrattan made a name for himself by fighting some of the reigning N.H.L. heavyweights.
        ''You're there to protect your star players from getting run at and sticked, and to add some spark to the game,'' he said.
        Even with fighting on the wane, Ruff said an enforcer could still contribute by acting as a deterrent for those players who would try to bully other teams' stars.
        ''It might not be an 80-game need, but there's a definite need for a player of Andrew's stature on our team,'' he said. ''Case in point: Some teams will try to abuse your skill guys.''
        And although fighting has slackened, no one thought it would disappear from the N.H.L. altogether.
        ''As a practical matter, no matter what our rules are, I don't believe fighting, per se, will ever be eliminated from hockey,'' Bill Daly, the N.H.L.'s deputy commissioner, wrote in an e-mail message.
        Peters said: ''There's always going to be fighting. It's an aggressive game. It's 20 guys out there full of testosterone flying around at high speeds, running into each other. It's a game where tempers flare and tensions run high.''
        Judging by the roar of the crowd when players begin throwing punches, fans seem to see entertainment value in fighting.
        ''In a town like this, they get excited about a goal, a big hit, and a fight,'' Ray said of Buffalo. ''They know the goaltenders. They know the big offensive stars and they know the fighters. The other guys on the team, the good defensive players and the role players, nobody even knows them.''
        Illustrating Ray's point, a crush of fans waited for autographs in a corridor of HSBC Arena after the Sabres lost to Ottawa on Saturday. Peters, as is often the case after home games, was one of the more popular players.
        He was dressed in a gray-pinstriped suit that, like his game, had been altered before the season. After losing weight, none of his clothes fit anymore. Except for a few scabs on his knuckles and some marks on his face, Peters resembled a young investment banker.
        With such a scene, it was hard to imagine the N.H.L. enforcer going completely out of fashion.
        HOCKEY
      