
        An Ethiopian court on Tuesday convicted the former dictator Mengistu Haile Mariam of genocide, but Mr. Mengistu may never face punishment, because he remains in exile in Zimbabwe.
        It was a marathon case, beginning 12 years ago, and along with Mr. Mengistu more than 70 high-ranking former officials were found guilty of various charges. The trial, held in Ethiopia's capital, Addis Ababa, was one of the rare instances when an African country tried its former leader.
        Mr. Mengistu ruled Ethiopia from 1977 to 1991, when government soldiers rounded up tens of thousands of students and intellectuals and killed them in a campaign called the Red Terror. Human Rights Watch has labeled it ''one of the most systematic uses of mass murder by a state ever witnessed in Africa.''
        Mr. Mengistu, 69, has been widely accused of killing many of the victims with his own hands, including even Ethiopia's last emperor, Haile Selassie, who was strangled in bed and buried under a toilet.
        Mr. Mengistu was also, in a way, responsible for an extended famine in 1984-85 that claimed one million lives and reinforced the image of Ethiopia as a poor and desperate country. He first denied that the famine was even happening and flew in planeloads of whiskey while his people starved.
        He was ousted by a guerrilla movement in 1991 and escaped to Zimbabwe, where he lives in a fancy villa under heavy guard. The Zimbabwean government has indicated it has no intention of extraditing him.
        According to Reuters, the Ethiopian High Court decision said Mr. Mengistu and his top officers ''have conspired to destroy a political group and kill people with impunity.''
        Mr. Mengistu is to be sentenced later this month in absentia and could face death by hanging.
        Despite the magnitude of his crimes, many people in Addis Ababa seemed unfazed by the guilty verdict. ''We're more concerned with the new people in jail, the political prisoners, than with these old cases,'' said Addis Adugna, an architect.
        Somalia is another distraction. In the past several months, Ethiopia has stepped up its military support of the weak transitional government, which is being threatened by Islamist forces on all sides. Islamist clerics took over Mogadishu, Somalia's capital, in June and have been steadily expanding their territory.
        The neighboring nations have been rivals for years, partly because of their religious differences, with Ethiopia having a strong Christian identity and Somalia being almost totally Muslim.
        On Tuesday, the Islamist forces in Somalia gave Ethiopia an ultimatum: Get out or die. The military chief, Sheik Yusuf Mohamed Siad, told reporters in Mogadishu, ''Starting today, if the Ethiopians don't leave our land within seven days, we will attack them and force them to leave our country.''
      