
        In the face of stiff opposition from the airline industry, the European Union moved forward Wednesday with plans to impose extra charges on foreign and domestic carriers that pollute too much.
        ''We are showing our determination to fight climate change,'' said Europe's environment commissioner, Stavros Dimas, who announced the proposal Wednesday in Brussels. ''This is one way to persuade other countries to come along with us.''
        The rules, which would be legally binding, would apply to all flights within the bloc starting in 2011. Foreign carriers landing and taking off from busy airports like those in Frankfurt, London and Paris would be obliged to join the system the following year. If enacted, the measure could drive up costs for airlines, potentially leading to higher airfares for travelers.
        The proposal draws from the principles of an established system that Europe now uses to help combat global warming and meet emissions goals set forth under the Kyoto Protocol.
        Under that plan, which has so far exempted airlines, governments set goals for the carbon dioxide emissions of producers of power, cement, fuels, pulp and paper. If they exceed those goals, companies must purchase allocations, or credits. Many airlines, supported by the United States government, are seeking to blunt the European plans, calling them expensive and unworkable. They want the International Civil Aviation Organization, a United Nations agency, to draw up any rules for emissions trading so that all countries comply.
        Giovanni Bisignani, director general of the International Air Transport Association, a group that includes most of the world's airlines, said Wednesday that he would continue to seek changes before the plan was approved by European Union governments and the European Parliament, a process that is likely to take years.
        ''We are concerned about the legal implications of applying the scheme outside Europe from 2012,'' Mr. Bisignani said. ''We must have a global approach for a global problem.''
        Mr. Dimas maintained that his plans were legal, and he encouraged governments and airlines to speed efforts to reach a global accord to cap emissions, rather than block European efforts.
        Peter Lockley, a policy analyst at the Aviation Environment Federation in London, praised Mr. Dimas for ''standing up to pressure from the U.S. and certain sections of the aviation industry'' by including all flights landing at and taking off from European airports.
        But Mr. Lockley criticized plans to give airlines most of their pollution credits free, rather than through more extensive auctions. Mr. Lockley also said that airlines, like other heavy polluters in Europe, should be required to reduce their emissions from 1990 levels, rather than from present levels.
        Officials from the International Air Transport Association acknowledged that they had already won concessions from Europe in recent weeks, including a delay in specific plans to regulate nitrogen oxide, another pollutant emitted by aircraft engines.
        British Airways said the planned legislation would ''now treat aviation more similarly to other industries.'' But Lufthansa, a German carrier, sharply criticized the plan, saying that more rapid action to streamline air traffic control and reduce flight detours and holding patterns would be far more effective at cutting emissions.
        The proposals ''would tie up resources and capital by bureaucracy,'' Lufthansa said, warning that ''important investments in environmentally friendly technologies would have to be postponed.'' Lufthansa is more dependent for overall sales than British Airways on flights that take off and land in the European Union.
        The international air transport group said that Europe's proposal could still cost airlines globally up to 2.9 billion euros ($3.8 billion) a year to buy allowances starting in 2012, when the rules are expected to cover all flights in and out of the union.
        But European officials said that airlines should be able to pass much of the extra costs on to passengers, who would face increases in ticket prices of $2 to $12 for a trip within the European Union over the next decade. Officials said a return flight to New York might cost an additional $10 to more than $50, depending on how much individual airlines would have to pay for extra carbon allowances.
      