
        The pharmacy benefits manager Express Scripts said yesterday that it was willing to engage in a proxy war, if necessary, in its $26 billion effort to acquire its larger rival Caremark Rx and break up the pending merger of Caremark and the drugstore giant CVS.
        The Express Scripts power play was testimony to the pressures drug-insurance middlemen like Express Scripts and Caremark are feeling as the $200 billion pharmacy benefits business changes around them.
        ''We would unquestionably prefer to work cooperatively with you to complete a negotiated transaction,'' George Paz, the chairman and chief executive of Express Scripts, said in a letter yesterday to Caremark's chief executive, Edwin M. Crawford.
        But if cooperation is not an option, Mr. Paz's letter said, his company has hired the proxy adviser MacKenzie Partners to take the matter directly to Caremark's shareholders.
        The letter detailed Express Scripts' offer. It would pay a premium over what Caremark shareholders would receive under the pending Caremark-CVS merger -- which the two companies indicated yesterday that they still intended to pursue.
        Caremark said it would review the Express Scripts offer, adding that it ''continues to be bound'' by the terms of its agreement with CVS. For its part, CVS said it remained ''confident in the long-term strategic value of our combination as well as the benefit to shareholders of CVS and Caremark.''
        News of Express Scripts' unsolicited takeover plan was first reported Sunday evening. Yesterday, after Express Scripts formally made its offer, Caremark's shares gained 10.5 percent, to close at $55.58.
        Mr. Paz said in a telephone interview yesterday afternoon that he had tried unsuccessfully to reach Mr. Crawford of Caremark, but ventured that ''he's got to be a happier man now than he was before the market opened today.''
        Express Scripts stock rose $1.31, or 1.9 percent, to $69.97.
        CVS shares lost 51 cents, or 1.7 percent, closing at $30.01.
        The No. 3 player to Caremark's No. 2 -- Medco Health Solutions is the largest pharmacy benefits manager -- Express Scripts is under the same sorts of pressures that may have influenced Caremark's decision to agree to a no-premium merger deal with CVS in November. The fourth-largest company in the field is CVS's own PharmaCare unit.
        The deal proposed by Express Scripts would create by far the largest company in pharmacy benefits management -- the business of acting as a middleman between drug companies and health plans that offer drug benefits to workers, retirees and Medicare enrollees.
        Mr. Paz said that combining his company with Caremark would save the two companies $500 million in reduced costs, while giving the merged entity greater clout in negotiating prices with drug makers.
        Cutting costs and gaining leverage with drug makers are important goals for the benefits manager. Coincidentally, the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services said yesterday that the agency planned to adopt a new pricing method for what the government spends on drugs for low-income Medicaid patients. The change is expected to affect discounts and rebates received by middlemen like Express Scripts and Caremark, and possibly reduce their profits.
        ''I have to believe that these guys see that 80 percent gross margins on generic drugs are not sustainable,'' said Larry N. Feinberg, managing partner of Oracle Partners, a health care hedge fund based in Greenwich, Conn.
        Mr. Paz declined yesterday to discuss the specifics of middleman profit margins. ''We do make more money on generics than on brand drugs,'' he said, noting that the average brand prescription costs the purchaser $130, while the average generic is around $40.
        ''That's why clients don't get concerned'' when patients are switched to generic substitutes, he said.
        Pharmacy benefits managers are also losing some customers for drug coverage as a result of the federal government's Medicare Part D program, which helps subsidize drugs for millions of older Americans. Health insurance companies like UnitedHealth Group, WellPoint and Aetna have signed up many of these people in an age group that accounts for 60 percent of all drug spending.
        Mr. Paz, in fact, pointed to mounting competition from such insurance companies as a reason that antitrust regulators should not view an Express Scripts-Caremark deal as anticompetitive.
        Traditionally, employers that offered drug benefits to retirees typically used benefit managers like Caremark and Express Scripts.
        But Kemp Dolliver, a Cowen & Company analyst, said that if ''employers start to shift their retirees into Part D, it becomes a game change that disadvantages pharmacy benefit managers.'' More of that retiree business would probably wind up with UnitedHealth and the other big insurers, Mr. Dolliver said.
        And then there is pressure from the retail front.
        In September, Wal-Mart began a program offering 30-day supplies of many generic drugs for $4 a prescription, an approach that has been mimicked to varying degrees by Target and Costco. Those programs could pose a threat to drugstore chains like CVS, and conceivably to companies like Caremark, if enough consumers see little reason to make co-payments of $5 or more to buy drugs covered by pharmacy benefit managers.
        So far, the CVS chain and other drugstores say the Wal-Mart program has not hurt them. But Mr. Feinberg said Wal-Mart was expected to add a generic version of Zocor, a popular cholesterol treatment, to its list. ''It's going to be bigger and bigger,'' he said.
        Against that background, Express Scripts made its offer of $26 billion in cash and stock yesterday. Caremark shareholders would receive $29.25 in cash and 0.426 share of Express Scripts stock for each share of Caremark under the offer.
        At yesterday's closing prices, that would make the Express Scripts offer half stock and half cash, worth a total of $59.06 a share, or 18 percent more than the CVS all-stock offer. Caremark shares closed Friday at $50.30 a share.
        With reported 2005 revenue of $16.3 billion, Express Scripts is much smaller than Caremark, with $33 billion last year, and Medco, with $37.9 billion. Express Scripts plans to borrow heavily to complete the deal. Citigroup and Credit Suisse have agreed to fully finance the deal with $13.4 billion in credit arrangements, Express Script said.
        Analysts said that Caremark shareholders had grumbled about the all-stock CVS deal, which valued Caremark at $50.12 a share based on yesterday's closing price.
        Andrew Speller, an A. G. Edwards analyst, sees a potential for a bidding war. ''I think CVS will come back with a similar type of offer,'' he said.
      