
        Here's the Flying Ace
        Q. Why on earth can a biplane and a small landing strip be found on the roof of 77 Water Street?
        A. For fun. Atop the structure, a 26-story office building at Old Slip that was completed in 1970, the developer, the William Kaufman Organization, installed a metal mockup of a British World War I Sopwith Camel and a small green artificial-turf runway. The plane, which is, of course, the one Snoopy flies when he imagines himself in aerial dogfights with the Red Baron in ''Peanuts,'' was designed by Rudolph de Harak and executed by the sculptor William Tarr.
        The Kaufman Organization did not respond to requests for comment, but it was apparently built for the enjoyment of viewers in taller buildings in the financial district. When the Buildings Department objected to the plane as the building was finished, calling it an illegal sculpture gallery in an open space, the architects argued that the public had no roof access and that the display could not be seen from the street.
        It is easily viewable by satellite on Google Maps and Mapquest, and a color photograph is available at sagerealty.com/properties.htm.
        The Little Flower's Army
        Q. My father, who is in his 80s, recalls a sort of New York City army during World War II called the City Patrol Corps. Did such a unit really exist?
        A. Absolutely, and it grew out of the urgency felt after Pearl Harbor. Nazi sabotage and bombs were assumed to be an imminent danger after America's entry into the war. The Police Department had been thinned by the draft, and air-raid wardens did not provide routine security.
        Furthermore, Gov. Herbert Lehman had refused Mayor Fiorello La Guardia's request to assign New York's National Guardsmen to cover waterfront property every night. In response, on Feb. 8, 1942, La Guardia established a volunteer regiment, which he insisted was not a private army but an auxiliary police force. Its name was the City Patrol Corps, whose story was told in ''Fiorello's Army,'' an article by Elliot Rosenberg that was published in 1995 in Seaport magazine.
        The corps (La Guardia had been told not to call it a guard) had police authority. Members served two four-hour shifts every eight weeks in their boroughs, and they responded to emergencies. They watched beaches, pumping stations and power plants. Their activities were mostly prosaic, like working on scrap drives, though they did stop some muggings and drugstore holdups.
        The corps, which was disbanded soon after the end of World War II, had as many as 7,000 volunteers, among them La Guardia's chauffeur. A few corps members wore guns, but most had makeshift weapons, including clubs made from the legs of pinball machines seized in La Guardia's famous raids.
        Where East Is East
        Q. Settle an argument, please. Are there any streets in Manhattan that are truly east-west?
        A. Just one, and that is not surprising since the Manhattan street grid, which dates to 1811, tilts northeast. To put it more technically, the grid, which was designed to conform to the shape of the island of Manhattan, is angled about 30 degrees east from geographic north.
        The only street that sits on a true east-west axis is Stuyvesant Street, which cuts diagonally from Third Avenue across Ninth Street to 10th Street in the East Village. It was mapped to the compass points by Peter Stuyvesant's great-grandson Petrus around 1789, before the city laid its grid. While there are other streets that don't follow the grid, none of them are true east-west.
        MICHAEL POLLAK
        F. Y. I. E-mail: fyi@nytimes.com
      