
        Ronell Wilson watches his trial with the uninhabited gaze of a great card champion.
        Though he faces the death penalty on charges of killing two undercover detectives, he betrays neither hope nor despair. Daily he ambles across the courtroom to a padded chair and fixes his eyes on some vague point in the middle distance.
        If rattled, he conceals it: Unexplained outbursts in his holding cell have led to delays. But in the courtroom, his smallest actions take on outsized significance. Come late one afternoon, he leaned back and stretched his arms and yawned deeply and then resumed his posture.
        For three weeks, prosecutors in federal court in Brooklyn have presented a variety of evidence against him. Jurors have heard from crime-scene investigators and a clothing shop owner, the city's chief medical examiner and a man who took out his garbage near the shooting, handwriting and ballistics and DNA experts, confessed accomplices and drug dealers and a patrol officer assigned to the Staten Island ferry.
        Even as the trial drew to an end last week, with closing arguments set for this morning, Mr. Wilson maintained his placid demeanor. Appearances are meaningful at a murder trial, and more so at a capital murder trial, as Judge Nicholas G. Garaufis affirmed by banishing police regalia from the gallery.
        Mr. Wilson, 24, who went by the street name of Rated R, dresses neatly for court in dark slacks and Oxfords and argyle sweaters. Close-trimmed sideburns taper down from his skull like unfinished exclamation marks to frame angular cheekbones and the cinnamon skin he mentions in his rap lyrics. Beyond his appearance, jurors have little more to know him by than those amateur rhymes, scribbled on scratch paper that the police found in his pockets.
        ''It's da light-skin kid,'' he wrote. ''Most hated Rated.''
        So his every blink and yawn and whisper bears the scrutiny of the attentive, middle-aged jurors, the families of the slain detectives, James V. Nemorin and Rodney J. Andrews, the colleagues of the prosecutors, the policemen in plainclothes, the curious onlookers and the defendant's mother, Cheryl Wilson. Daily she sits in the front row, leaning forward, hands clasped, rarely catching a glance from her son, who has been ordered not to speak with spectators.
        At the trial's start last month, a knock came on the door and everyone stood and the jurors entered and Judge Garaufis introduced the players, three assistant United States attorneys and a federal agent, three defense lawyers and, eventually, their client.
        ''Good morning,'' Mr. Wilson said, the only words he has audibly delivered in the courtroom.
        ''The United States,'' Judge Garaufis reminded the jurors, ''intends to seek the death penalty against this defendant.''
        Mr. Wilson showed no reaction. A glaze cast across his eyes and remained as his erstwhile friends ascended the witness stand one by one to identify him. They said he was the man who took a .44-caliber revolver, met with the undercover detectives in a car on the pretense of selling them a gun and fired one bullet through the back of each man's head.
        On the second day of testimony, prosecutors called Jessie Jacobus, a 6-foot-3, 320-pound man who has admitted to riding with Mr. Wilson during the shooting, and asked him to decipher an audio surveillance recording. As the sounds of the detectives' last conversations resounded, their families wailed and collapsed and hollered, ''Mercy.''
        When the judge cleared the courtroom, big Jessie Jacobus, imprisoned for murder, was rubbing tears from his eyes. Mr. Wilson surveyed this scene impassively, his mouth opened the degree of a coin slot. The marshals led him out, and he obeyed with neither hesitation nor hurry.
        By the second week of testimony, Mr. Wilson began rejecting his food or otherwise delaying his return to the courtroom. Judge Garaufis did not disclose the nature of the hindrances, though government workers could be seen arriving with a single takeout meal after the appointed end of the midday recess. Mr. Wilson may eventually be executed, but he will not have to eat egg salad.
        On Dec. 5, he was led into the courtroom around 11 a.m., an hour and a half late and visibly shaken. He slouched deep into his chair. One of his lawyers, Kelly Sharkey, rubbed Mr. Wilson's shoulder. As the jury entered, he regained his poise.
        ''First, let me apologize for the delay,'' Judge Garaufis said, offering no more insight than a subway conductor, ''which was unavoidable.''
        As the testimony of Mr. Wilson's betrayers gave way to scientific accountings presented as corroboration, a different sort of tension arrived in the courtroom.
        To varying degrees of certainty, a technician matched fibers from the car to Mr. Wilson's San Antonio Spurs ball cap. A ballistics expert matched bullet fragments to a gun found in Mr. Wilson's stepfather's apartment. A handwriting analyst ascribed authorship of violent rap lyrics to Mr. Wilson. A telecommunications expert plotted the electronic trails of cellphones carried during the killings. A DNA examiner identified the detectives' blood and traces of Mr. Wilson's skin cells on jeans and a pair of batting gloves.
        The city's chief medical examiner, Charles S. Hirsch, walked in with his old-fashioned briefcase and charted the bullets' path through the dead men's skulls. He said the shots were probably fired from the rear driver's side seat, Mr. Wilson's position in the car. When the defense suggested that Mr. Jacobus had leaned over from the rear passenger side to fire, prosecutors called witnesses to show Mr. Jacobus is right-handed. The defense lawyers called witnesses to suggest that Mr. Jacobus might be the gunman, then quickly rested their case.
        Toward the end of the trial, Mr. Wilson brightened his attire, shedding maroon dress shirts for bright yellow ones. He drooped down in his chair as though poured there, leaning back, feet propped, head low. He whispered in clipped tones, shaking an open palm toward the lawyer to his left, toward the lawyer to his right. He rubbed his scalp; he rubbed his steady brown eyes.
      