
        The Chandler family, which long owned The Los Angeles Times, has begun holding talks with several private equity firms about forming a consortium to bid on part of the Tribune Company, people briefed on the discussions said yesterday.
        The talks come six months after the Chandlers pressed to put the Tribune up for sale. The family, which became a large shareholder in Tribune when it sold Times Mirror to the company, has been critical of Tribune's management and its slumping stock price.
        When the Chandlers first clashed with Tribune management, the family had no interest in buying the company, people involved in the talks said.
        Now, frustrated with the muted interest that the auction of Tribune has so far generated, the Chandlers are exploring the idea of leading a private equity consortium as a way to either create value in a leveraged buyout of the assets or to possibly start a bidding war.
        Practically no newspaper companies, with the exception of the Gannett Company, have expressed interest in Tribune, which in addition to The Los Angeles Times owns The Chicago Tribune, Newsday and other newspapers, as well as two dozen television stations and the Chicago Cubs. A few private equity firms have submitted bids that were much lower than anticipated.
        The advantage the Chandler family would have in the auction is its status as the owner of 20 percent of the Tribune Company. A deal could be structured with the Chandlers owning 51 percent of a Tribune unit and private equity firms the rest. For example, Tribune could decide to spin off its television unit and sell its newspaper unit to a Chandler-led group on a tax-advantaged basis. Such a consortium would not have to pay the enormous tax bill that an outside bidder would be faced with, an issue that has scared off some would-be suitors. And such a buyout structure, loaded with debt, would allow family members to cash out of Tribune to a degree, the people briefed on the discussions said.
        The Chandler family's first preference remains for the company to be sold in its entirety to an outside buyer, these people said.
        Among Tribune's early suitors were a group including Providence Equity Partners, Madison Dearborn Partners and Apollo Management. Other firms, the Texas Pacific Group, the Carlyle Group and Bain Capital, are considering whether to bid in the next round either separately or possibly together.
        The tax considerations have been central to the family's discussions about its Tribune stake.
        In an article this year, The Los Angeles Times described the family this way: ''The Chandlers have a long history of antipathy toward taxes, as do many people in their rarefied tax bracket. They also are known for structuring deals that give them maximum income.''
        ''When they have sold assets, such as the cable systems and TV stations that Times Mirror sold in the 1990s, they have pushed for aggressive tax advantages that have been challenged by other shareholders,'' the article said.
        Of course, the Chandlers' interest could also be part of a plan to help create a competitive dynamic for Tribune. If its involvement helps propel a higher rival bid, the family would benefit, too.
        Despite the Chandlers' role in building The Los Angeles Times, the family's interest in Tribune appears to be motivated strictly by economics, unlike that of the billionaire investors Eli Broad, Ron Burkle or David Geffen who have expressed interest in acquiring Tribune or some of its individual papers with plans to act as a benefactor.
        A spokesman for the Chandler family declined to comment.
        Shares of Tribune, which rose as high as $34 in September on hopes of a deal, have since retreated. The shares rose 14 cents, to close at $32.49 yesterday.
        The Chandlers are descendants of the famous family, led by Gen. Harrison Gray Otis and his son-in-law, Harry Chandler, that exercised political and financial control over Southern California in the first half of the 20th century. They included the late Otis Chandler, a member of the fourth generation, who, as publisher of The Los Angeles Times from 1960 to 1980, expanded that paper's ambition and reach. He also alienated more conservative members of his family, which today is a diffused clan of about 170 people.
        In June, the Chandler family said publicly that the company's financial performance was dismal and its strategic direction muddled, and it called on the company's board to consider a breakup.
        In September, the company's board voted to explore ways of creating additional value for shareholders and also made a deal with the Chandlers, increasing their stake in the company to 20 percent, from 15 percent.
        The family now has three representatives on the Tribune board: Jeffrey Chandler, one of California's largest avocado growers; Roger Goodan, his cousin; and William Stinehart Jr., a family lawyer.
        They are advised by Thomas Unterman, a lawyer and venture capitalist, who has worked for the family for years and has engineered a series of complex deals, most of them designed to help minimize taxes.
      