
        Fannie Mae's main regulator sued the company's former chairman and chief executive, Franklin D. Raines, and two top financial officers yesterday in an effort to extract more than $215 million in bonus payouts and fines over their involvement in a huge-scale accounting scandal.
        The regulator, the Office of Federal Housing and Enterprise Oversight, is seeking about $100 million in penalties. But its effort to recoup more than $115 million in bonus payments is notable for its rarity and size.
        Even in the aftermath of the Enron scandal, only a handful of company boards have aggressively tried to claw back executive bonuses or departure packages when questionable accounting or wrongdoing was later discovered. The Securities and Exchange Commission has rarely taken similar action. And previous cases have involved much smaller amounts of money.
        But the regulator here, known in government shorthand as Ofheo, seems intent on sending a message to Capitol Hill, where legislation is to be debated that would give the office greater authority.
        ''Ofheo basically may be trying to send a signal that they are going to be really tough under their jurisdiction,'' said Henry T. Hu, a professor at the University of Texas Law School. ''They traditionally have not had the clout compared to other regulators for banks. And by bringing this action, they may want to send the fear of God to these executives.''
        Ofheo filed 101 civil charges against Mr. Raines; Fannie Mae's former chief financial officer, J. Timothy Howard; and the former controller, Leanne G. Spencer.
        The Ofheo director, James B. Lockhart III, said in a conference call yesterday: ''We believed as an agency that these three individuals, separately and together, did serious harm to the company. There is a long list of charges that show they allowed this company to grow out of control.''
        Echoing many findings that the agency's 27-month investigation into Fannie Mae uncovered in May, the lawsuit contended that the three executives took part in widespread misconduct and mismanagement from 1998 to 2004. It accused them of filing misleading financial reports, improperly applying accounting principles while knowingly failing to establish sound internal controls and misleading regulators. All the while, the three were said to have been manipulating Fannie Mae earnings to maximize their bonuses.
        A lawyer representing Mr. Raines, Kevin M. Downey, called the accusations false and said in a letter to Ofheo that Mr. Lockhart was a ''fatally biased regulator'' who was using ''Mr. Raines as a prop in the interests'' of his own political agenda. He called on Mr. Lockhart to remove himself immediately from any further regulatory action.
        Steven M. Salky, a lawyer for Mr. Howard, called the charges ''a work of unsubstantiated fiction.'' David S. Krakoff, a lawyer for Ms. Spencer, did not return a phone call requesting comment.
        Ofheo's move yesterday will set in motion a complex legal process that could take years to resolve. Upon its filing, the suit will go to an administrative law judge who will oversee hearings and eventually make a ruling. The judge will then present his decision to the director of Ofheo, who may accept, modify or set it aside. Should a defendant disagree with the findings, he or she may appeal the decision to a federal court judge for review. Mr. Downey said yesterday that Ofheo should allow the executives to challenge the agency's findings immediately in federal court.
        The administrative law process can be cumbersome. Ofheo filed a similar suit against the former chief executive and chief financial officers of another federal-linked lender, Freddie Mac, in December 2003, seeking civil penalties and the return of more than $37 million in bonuses. That case has been bogged down in intense battles for three years and is still wending its way through administrative law courts.
        Ofheo said it was seeking more than $100 million in civil penalties ''in light of the multibillion-dollar harm'' Fannie Mae caused to investors. The company recently completed a $6.3 billion restatement to correct its financial results up to 2004, among the largest for any public company.
        But Wall Street analysts expect that it will be at least a year before Fannie Mae can issue current financial statements. The company's shares slipped 11 cents yesterday, to $60.16.
        In May, Fannie Mae agreed to pay $400 million in civil penalties to resolve charges with Ofheo and the S.E.C. The Justice Department and the S.E.C., while no longer investigating the company, have said that they continue to look at other former employees who were involved in the scandal.
        Fannie Mae declined to comment on the Ofheo lawsuit.
        Ofheo is also seeking a cease-and-desist order that would bar Mr. Raines and the other defendants from conducting business with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Since Fannie Mae is bearing their legal bills, it is also asking that they pay back those fees if there is a finding of misconduct.
        But perhaps Ofheo's boldest action yesterday was in seeking to recoup the bonuses. In its complaint, the regulator asked that Mr. Raines, Mr. Howard and Ms. Spencer give back a total of more than $115 million in bonus payouts from 1998 to 2004, which the agency contends represented unjust enrichment. Under this arrangement, the former executives would be allowed to retain only their salaries.
        It is asking Mr. Raines to give back about $84.6 million of the $91.1 million that he collected. In the past, the agency said that roughly $52 million of that amount was directly tied to the achievement of earnings targets.
        But in an interview yesterday, Ofheo's general counsel, Alfred Pollard, said that the new, higher amount reflected the regulator's interest in recovering past stock-option compensation, too.
        ''We are also alleging these people were engaging in misconduct and mismanagement,'' he said. ''Options, in effect, are given for working for the company, and it was mismanaged so they didn't deserve it.''
        Ofheo is asking that Mr. Howard return some $27.3 million and Ms. Spencer about $5.6 million in pay. But in the complaint and news release, it made no mention of recovering pensions or other funds.
        Mr. Pollard said that the regulator was still interested in recouping that money. Even though Mr. Raines was ousted over the accounting problems, he received a pension valued around $25 million, according to a Harvard study. Mr. Howard's pension was estimated at $6 million.
      