
        James Baker ran after W. with a butterfly net for a while, but it is now clear that the inmates are still running the asylum.
        The Defiant Ones came striding from the Pentagon yesterday, the troika of wayward warriors marching abreast in their dark suits and power ties. W., Rummy and Dick Cheney were so full of quick-draw confidence that they might have been sauntering down the main drag of Deadwood.
        Far from being run out of town, the defense czar who rivals Robert McNamara for deadly incompetence has been on a victory lap in Baghdad, Mosul and Washington. Yesterday's tribute had full military honors, a color guard, a 19-gun salute, an Old Guard performance with marching musicians -- including piccolo players -- in Revolutionary War costumes, John Philip Sousa music and the chuckleheaded neocons and ex-Rummy deputies who helped screw up the occupation, Paul Wolfowitz and Douglas Feith, cheering in the audience.
        It was surreal: the septuagenarian who arrogantly dismissed initial advice to send more troops to secure Iraq, being praised as ''the finest secretary of defense this nation has ever had'' by his pal, the vice president, even as a desperate White House drafted ways to reinvade Iraq by sending more troops in a grasping-at-straws effort to reverse the chaos caused by Rummy's mistakes.
        Just imagine the send-off a defense secretary would have gotten who hadn't sabotaged the Army, Iraq, global security, our chance to get Osama, our moral credibility, the deficit and American military confidence.
        Even Joyce Rumsfeld got a Distinguished Public Service Award ribbon placed around her neck. The grandiose ceremony featured everything but the gold-plated matching set of pistols Tommy Franks, another failed warrior, and his wife, Cathy, recently received from a weapons manufacturer. (His had four stars and diamonds; hers, rubies and their marriage date.)
        W. never seems as alarmed about the devastation in Iraq as he should be. He told People magazine, ''I must tell you, I'm sleeping a lot better than people would assume,'' and he told Brit Hume that his presidency was ''a joyful experience.''
        He slacked off on his slacker effort to form a new Iraq plan. (Can't these guys ever order pizzas and pull some all-nighters?) Mr. Bush was busy this week hosting Christmas parties for a press corps he disdains; convening a malaria conference at the National Geographic with Dr. Burke of ''Grey's Anatomy,'' Isaiah Washington; and presiding over a hero's departure for the defense secretary he actually dumped, not because of incompetence but for political expediency.
        The Rummy hoopla was a way for W. to signal his decision to shred the Baker-Hamilton study, after reportedly denouncing it as a flaming cow pie. Condi Rice signaled the same, telling The Washington Post that she did not want to negotiate with Syria and Iran, as the Iraq Study Group had proposed, because ''the compensation'' might be too high.
        The Democrats thought that when they had won the election, they won the debate on the war and they had W. cornered. But the president is leaning toward surging over the Democrats, voters, Baker and the Bush 41 crowd and some of his own commanders.
        W. seems gratified by the idea that rather than having his ears boxed by his father's best friend, he's going to go down swinging, or double down, in the metaphor du jour, on his macho bet in Iraq. He's reading about Harry Truman and casting himself as a feisty Truman, but he's heading toward late L.B.J. The White House budget office is studying how much it will cost to finance The Surge, an infusion of 20,000 to 50,000 troops into Baghdad to make one last try at ''victory.'' The policy would devolve from ''We stand down as they stand up'' to ''We stand up more and maybe someday they will, too.''
        Some serving commanders are not in favor of The Surge because they fret that it will infantilize Iraqis even more about assuming responsibility for their own security. They also fear that the insurgents, who have nowhere to go, will outwait our troops.
        But W. would rather take a risk in Iraq than risk being a wimp. So he continued to wrap himself in muscular delusions, asserting that on Rummy's watch, ''the United States military helped the Iraqi people establish a constitutional democracy in the heart of the Middle East, a watershed event in the story of freedom.''
        Dick Cheney offered this praise to his friend: ''On the professional side, I would not be where I am today but for the confidence that Don first placed in me those many years ago.''
        Alas, we wouldn't be where we are today, either.
        Op-Ed Columnist
      