
        The former N.F.L. coach Jim Fassel, who was credited with recruiting and coaching John Elway at Stanford as an assistant there, was interviewed for the Cardinal's vacant head-coaching job in Chicago yesterday, according to a person with knowledge of the Stanford search.
        Fassel, who was fired as the Baltimore Ravens' offensive coordinator in October, coached the Giants for seven years, and he led them to the Super Bowl in January 2001.
        He served as an assistant at Stanford from 1979 to 1983. While there, he coached Elway, the program's hallmark player. Fassel still enjoys a strong relationship with Elway, and that could help Fassel's chances.
        Two years ago, when a reporter called Fassel to gauge his interest in the vacant Notre Dame job, he said that the only college job he would probably ever take was Stanford's.
        Montana Coach Bobby Hauck; the Hall of Fame receiver James Lofton, who is a Stanford graduate; and University of San Diego Coach Jim Harbaugh have also been interviewed for the job. Lofton is the wide receivers coach for the San Diego Chargers.
        Hauck, a Montana graduate, was interviewed in Salt Lake City on Sunday.
        Harbaugh, a former N.F.L. quarterback, was offered the Tulane coaching job in the past week but turned it down. Bob Toledo, the former U.C.L.A. coach, accepted the position.
        Fassel failed as the Ravens' offensive coordinator this year, his second season in the position. Since Fassel's firing and the insertion of Ravens Coach Brian Billick as the play-caller, the Ravens' offense has taken off and the team has won six of its past seven games.
        Fassel had a career record of 60-55-1 with the Giants. But he has not landed another head-coaching job in the N.F.L. despite multiple interviews.
        EXTRA POINTS
        The Boston College coaching search appears to have been narrowed to five candidates: Mark Whipple, the Steelers' quarterbacks coach; Jeff Jagodzinski, the Packers' offensive coordinator; Richmond Coach Dave Clawson; Tulsa Coach Steve Kragthorpe; and Jay Norvell, the Nebraska offensive coordinator.
        COLLEGES
      