
        DOMIKNITRIX  Whip Your Knitting into Shape.  By Jennifer Stafford.  256 pp. North Light Books.  $19.99.
        NAUGHTY NEEDLES  Sexy, Saucy Knits for the Bedroom and Beyond.  By Nikol Lohr.  144 pp. Potter Craft.  $19.95.
        WHAT a shame that it is so difficult to find the knitwear you need in stores, catalogs or on the Internet. Sure, you can find prosaic items like hats, scarves, mittens, socks, sweaters, leggings, ponchos, baby blankets and sofa throws.
        But where do you go for what you really crave -- yarn bras, knitted heart-shaped pillows that read ''Spank Me,'' caps crested with lime-green faux mohawks, and snow hats with devil's horns? Wouldn't you know -- you have no recourse but to knit them yourself.
        In her saucy how-to guide, ''Domiknitrix,'' the San Francisco needle queen Jennifer Stafford lays out a fuzzy array of delectable items for the nimble-fingered to create. Once, long ago, she writes, she herself was ''just a plain bad crafter'' who did not know knit from purl.
        But time and effort turned her into what she calls a ''domiknitrix'' (plural: domiknitrices), ''a woman who dominates her knitting.'' She explains: ''I discipline my yarn. I force it into the form I want it to take. I am persistent, firm and commanding.'' You can do the same, she insists: ''Learn the rules or else.'' Her tone is jokey; her purpose is serious.
        Determined to deliver ''astonishing'' designs that can be replicated at home, Ms. Stafford tested each pattern thoroughly before publication, ''wrecking'' her body in the process, and requiring her to seek a physical therapist to soothe her stiff joints. To her, this was ''delicious pain.''
        ''If you're looking for easy, mindless knitting,'' she writes, ''you're not made in the mold of a Domiknitrix.''
        Still, she tries to simplify with illustrated step-by-step instructions, from basic stitches to join work and tricky fixes for snags and dropped stitches. Some photos show the author's tattooed arms in black leather lace-up gauntlets, trailing hot-pink yarn.
        One of her patterns, a spike-crowned Jughead hat, is so challenging that she had to enlist an aeronautical engineer to diagram it. ''Domiknitrix'' does not limit itself to accessories. The book also includes lovely practical garments -- sleek zippered sweater coats, frisky hoodies and cleavage-baring vests and slinky tees that cling to the body's curves. These are not your grandma's afghans, she reminds her readers: ''Remember, tight sweaters save yarn!''
        NIKOL LOHR -- a domiknitrix if there ever was one -- has an even more effective way to save yarn. Don't knit sweaters, knit skimpy red-hot bikinis, ''kinderwhore'' socks, ''flapper-inspired'' garter slips with peekaboo knitted lace panels (even less yarn!), bustiers and tap pants laced with satin ribbon, woolen handcuffs, fringed nighties and cunning stuffed animals to throw among your bed pillows. ''Parade around in your naughty clothes and you'll surely get a reward,'' she promises. If you spend the time it takes to create these intricate confections, you deserve one.
        Ms. Lohr's beautifully illustrated and coyly annotated book, ''Naughty Needles,'' could be a 50's pinup calendar for wool fetishists. The tableaus she presents are provocative in a retro way, mixing Betty Boop va-va-voom with Doris Day innocence. ''There's something both comforting and surprisingly titillating about the aesthetic,'' she writes, explaining that many of her designs were inspired by ''fresh-scrubbed'' television sexpots like Samantha in ''Bewitched,'' Jeannie in ''I Dream of Jeannie,'' and Mary Ann from ''Gilligan's Island.''
        ''Maybe squeaky clean is the new dirty,'' she says, adding, ''Cutie-pie sexy (unlike vamp sexy) is a cinch to pull off on a daily basis.'' Also, ''if you fall on your face as a Mary Ann, you're still adorable.'' In one audacious full-page photo, which looks like a still from a Russ Meyer film, Ms. Lohr shows two models in mohair bikinis engaged in cavewoman-style combat on a rock. ''Knitting is sexy. There, I said it,'' she writes.
        Her meaning is subtler than may appear. For her, it's about much more than making angora tap pants: ''It fuses vision and skill into a creative superpower,'' she writes.
        It also demands a mental agility that might trip up a nuclear physicist. To make that cavegirl bikini top, you must decipher such runic instructions as: ''Dec as above (ssk/k2tog with the 34d and 4th st in from either side) every other row until you hold 14 (17,20,23) sts.''
        Got that? No? Well, there's always J. Crew.
        BOOKS OF STYLE
      