
        Sheldon Silver could always just say no.
        That is the nightmare facing Forest City Ratner, the real estate developer whose $4 billion Atlantic Yards project must now be approved by an obscure state oversight board on which Mr. Silver, the state Assembly speaker, controls one of three votes.
        Over three years, Forest City has assembled an astonishingly wide and deep political coalition behind the Brooklyn project, ranging from outgoing Gov. George E. Pataki to Acorn, the liberal advocacy group for low-income people. The developer has endured thousands of pages of studies and reviews, staged hundreds of meetings and hearings, beat back lawsuits and persisted in the face of a growing and energetic coalition of opponents and critics.
        But now -- once again -- the fate of a multibillion-dollar project comes down to Mr. Silver, a politician who has not hesitated to delay or halt grand development plans when he deems it appropriate.
        It was Mr. Silver, along with Joseph L. Bruno, the Senate majority leader, who effectively killed the West Side Stadium last year by withholding his vote on the Public Authorities Control Board. And in October, Mr. Silver delayed another major project, the $900 million Moynihan Station, questioning the financing behind it.
        It remains unclear whether Atlantic Yards, which is to include an arena for the Nets, will meet a similar fate. Mr. Silver has said he generally supports the project, along with Mr. Bruno and Mr. Pataki. Each controls one vote on the board, and the three must vote together to approve a project. They have already set aside $100 million in state funds for Atlantic Yards, and at a news conference on Thursday, Mr. Silver called the Brooklyn project ''worthy of the area.''
        But behind those words lies an array of conflicting agendas and political forces. They include not just the substance of the Yards proposal, but also the divisions between local Assembly members on the project, the lobbying of numerous unions and civic groups and the enduring power politics and rivalries of Albany itself.
        Mr. Silver's vote against Moynihan Station launched a still-simmering war of words between Mr. Silver and Charles A. Gargano, the chairman of the Empire State Development Corporation, the state agency overseeing Moynihan Station and the Atlantic Yards project. Mr. Gargano suggested Mr. Silver was crooked, and Mr. Silver returned the favor. Most recently, on Thursday, he called Mr. Gargano ''a dismal failure'' as chairman.
        Pataki administration officials have suggested that Mr. Silver is eager to deny the governor a legacy project. Mr. Pataki has not yet scheduled a vote on the Yards for the control board's final meeting this year, on Wednesday. That suggests that the governor, with only days left in office, feels he would have more to lose than Mr. Silver would in any showdown.
        ''Because of the fact that approval requires the vote of all three members, there's an effort to build consensus for these projects,'' said Scott Reif, a spokesman for the governor. ''Right now we're in a review and discussion phase.''
        But the speaker, having already helped delay or kill two major city projects, might not want to face blame for blocking a third.
        Mr. Silver must also contend with the variety of interests represented by his members, and in a town saturated with lobbyists, he is prickly about being lobbied too hard. Many Atlantic Yards supporters are reluctant to speak on the record about the control board vote.
        ''I think undue pressure frequently backfires,'' said James F. Brennan, a Brooklyn assemblyman who has criticized the project and sought to reduce its size -- 8 million square feet -- significantly.
        Several of his colleagues from north Brooklyn have made similar requests, including Hakeem Jeffries, the assemblyman-elect from the 57th District, which includes most of the 22-acre project site.
        ''I've articulated my concerns to the speaker in writing, and beyond that, I think it would be counterproductive at this time to discuss the matter publicly,'' said Mr. Jeffries, who said he was ''confident'' that Mr. Silver would take into account the views of the Brooklyn delegation.
        That includes, however, a cluster of state lawmakers from south Brooklyn, who are almost unequivocal in their support of the project as it now stands. Forest City Ratner's chief lobbyist, Bruce Bender, is close to those members; like many of them, he began his career in the area's leading political organization, the Thomas Jefferson Democratic Club.
        ''Speaker Silver has always acted with the city's and state's best interests at heart, and we are confident he will continue to do what is best for New York,'' Mr. Bender said.
        Forest City is also well connected in Albany circles beyond the Brooklyn legislators. Indeed, for several years after the 9/11 attacks, Mr. Silver convened the Democratic caucus's annual retreat in a hotel the company owned in Battery Park City, near ground zero. (Forest City is also the development partner in building a new Midtown headquarters for The New York Times Company.)
        Technically, the Public Authorities Control Board has a relatively narrow function: ensuring the integrity and propriety of the state's financial commitments to development projects. And some close to Mr. Silver insisted that he would not use a potential vote as a lever to force unrelated changes to Atlantic Yards, so long as its finances were in order.
        ''He will continue to be careful that the P.A.C.B. is not a forum for horse-trading or policy judgments and remains a fiscal watchdog over irresponsible state authorities, like E.S.D.C.,'' the Empire State Development Corporation, said Richard L. Brodsky, a Westchester assemblyman who is chairman of the committee that oversees public authorities.
        Even on those grounds, however, the project faces some hurdles. Both Forest City Ratner and the development corporation have so far kept the project's financial projections secret. No one else knows how much the developer expects to make from the Atlantic Yards, how big it needs to be to turn a profit, or how much profit will be needed to sustain its more popular elements, including about 2,250 units of moderately priced housing.
        In recent days, the development corporation has turned over some financial information to Mr. Silver's control board staff. But Eileen Larrabee, a spokeswoman for Mr. Silver, described it as ''very cursory information, basically what's available on the Web.''
        She added, ''We have asked for some detailed financial and economic information that has not yet been provided.''
      