
        Saying that he was mentally damaged as a result of his three years and eight months in a naval brig in South Carolina, lawyers for Jose Padilla asked a federal judge in Miami yesterday to determine his competency to stand trial on terrorism conspiracy charges.
        Mr. Padilla, 36, a United States citizen who was publicly accused of plotting a dirty bomb attack and pronounced an enemy combatant in 2002, was transferred from military custody into the civilian law enforcement system earlier this year. But, his lawyers say, he has been unable to assist in his own defense, and mental health experts have been unable to help him or to help them deal with him.
        ''Jose's experience as a detainee was so traumatic that it's physically and mentally painful for him to answer the questions that we put to him,'' said Orlando do Campo, a federal public defender in Miami. ''He just shuts down. We're covering a lot of the same area as his interrogators, and he doesn't want to relive it.''
        Saying that there was ''sufficient cause'' to conduct a competency hearing, the government, in papers filed yesterday, urged the judge to do so.
        The government itself cited the affidavit of a psychiatrist for the defense, Dr. Angela Hegarty, who said that Mr. Padilla did not understand the nature and consequences of the proceedings against him and that he suffered ''impairment in reasoning'' as a result of post-traumatic stress disorder ''complicated by the effects of prolonged isolation.''
        Mr. Padilla's lawyers said he opposed this request that his competency be evaluated. Dr. Hegarty, one of two mental health professionals who examined him, said Mr. Padilla was ''fearful of being thought of as crazy.'' She described him as ''hypervigilant,'' his eyes darting about, his face twitching into grimaces, his ''startle response'' on constant high alert.
        Mr. Padilla's trial, which involves two other defendants also accused of running a ''North American terror support cell,'' is scheduled to start on Jan. 22 and expected to last about five months. Even before the motion filed yesterday, a delay seemed possible or even probable because of the extensive pretrial litigation in the complex case.
        Now the issue of determining Mr. Padilla's competency could freeze many matters. For instance, his lawyers have asked Judge Marcia G. Cooke of Federal District Court to dismiss the charges because of ''pre-indictment delay'' -- Mr. Padilla was apprehended in May 2002 and indicted in November 2005 -- because of failure to provide a speedy trial and because of ''outrageous government conduct.''
        Judge Cooke set a hearing date for Monday to address these motions. But the government said yesterday that it would be pointless to discuss accusations of government misconduct based on Mr. Padilla's word if his competence was in question. The government vehemently denies that Mr. Padilla was mistreated in military custody.
      