
        Federal investigators have issued subpoenas to at least two firms linked to the State Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, as part of their investigation into his business dealings, one of Mr. Bruno's former business partners and a legislative aide said yesterday.
        One of the companies was a partnership involving Mr. Bruno and an influential Albany lobbyist that bought and sold lakeside property in Rensselaer County, including a parcel that was purchased by the wife of Jared E. Abbruzzese. Mr. Abbruzzese is an investor in a group seeking control of the state's thoroughbred racing franchise -- a decision in which Mr. Bruno will play a key role.
        The other company is a consulting firm that Mr. Bruno operated out of his home that he said had ''a client relationship with lawyers and businesspeople.'' The senator has not identified the clients, but said his work involved providing advice on marketing and business development.
        It was unclear whether any of Mr. Bruno's other business dealings have been drawn into the investigation, which Mr. Bruno has said is examining his ''relationships and business interests'' over the last six years. The two companies that received subpoenas are just a small part of Mr. Bruno's broad array of personal financial interests, several of which have intersected with his activities as the most powerful Republican in the State Legislature.
        Mr. Bruno has purchased stock in about a half-dozen companies whose principals obtained state aid or contracts, sometimes with his help, according to a review of his financial-disclosure reports and other public records. He also once co-owned a small apartment building with an Albany-area businessman, who said that Mr. Bruno asked him to step in and replace the senator's son as an investment partner.
        Mr. Bruno, who said he learned of the investigation into his business dealings several months ago, disclosed the inquiry at a news conference he called suddenly on Tuesday.
        Yesterday, John McArdle, a spokesman for Mr. Bruno, confirmed the impression Mr. Bruno gave on Tuesday that his firm, Capital Business Consultants, was subpoenaed.
        The disclosure has rattled the marble-halled State Capitol and prompted speculation about his political viability. As recently as October, Mr. Bruno was calling on the embattled state comptroller, Alan G. Hevesi, a Democrat, to resign in the face of claims that he used state employees to chauffer his wife.
        The United States Attorney's office in Syracuse, which is directing the investigation, declined to comment yesterday.
        William Dreyer, a lawyer for Mr. Bruno, also declined to comment.
        The inquiry, according to a law enforcement official who has knowledge of the investigation and would speak only on the condition of anonymity, is focusing on how Mr. Bruno's personal affairs may relate to his activities as Senate majority leader.
        While Mr. Bruno's revelation threw a broad spotlight on his personal financial affairs, much attention has focused on his relationship with Mr. Abbruzzese, a friend who is a founding investor in Empire Racing Associates, one of several groups vying for the horse racing franchise. Mr. Bruno will have a major role in awarding the franchise, along with the Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, and Governor-elect Eliot Spitzer.
        One of the federal subpoenas was issued to the First Grafton Corporation, a real estate partnership involving Mr. Bruno that sold 17 housing lots -- including one to Mr. Abbruzzese's wife, Sherrie, for $90,000 in November 2004.
        Mr. Bruno had a 25 percent interest in the partnership, whose other major investors included James D. Featherstonhaugh, a prominent Albany lawyer and lobbyist. Yesterday, Mr. Featherstonhaugh (pronounced feather-stun-HAW), who kept the records for the partnership, said federal investigators had recently issued a subpoena for them.
        Over the last four years, Mr. Bruno directed $500,000 in state funds to Evident Technologies, a company financed by Mr. Abbruzzese, and was instrumental in obtaining $2.5 million in state aid for a joint- development project involving Evident and Russell Sage College in Troy, N.Y., near Mr. Bruno's home.
        Mr. Abbruzzese invited Mr. Bruno to fly on his private jet, contributed through his companies more than $118,000 to a campaign committee controlled by Mr. Bruno, and was involved in the senator's purchase of stock in Tejas Inc., a small securities brokerage in Texas that was closely connected to Mr. Abbruzzese. Mr. Bruno ultimately lost money on the stock purchase.
        Mr. Bruno's investment in Tejas was one of several that he has made over the years in companies whose principals have interests before the state.
        In July 2001, Mr. Bruno took credit for securing $500,000 in state money for a joint research project involving Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy and Plug Power Inc., a maker of fuel cells, near Albany, that has had contracts with the state and received other government assistance. At the time, Mr. Bruno was a shareholder in both Plug Power and a sister company, Mechanical Technology. He bought stock in both firms in 2000, according to his financial disclosure reports.
        Mr. McArdle said the senator sold his shares in both companies in 2005 at a loss. Mr. Bruno is not alone in having been a Plug Power shareholder. Other lawmakers who have owned its stock include Mr. Silver, the Assembly speaker.
        Mr. Bruno also has owned shares of at least two companies, Vytek and Interliant, run by Leonard Fassler, an information-technology entrepreneur from Westchester County. Vytek had part of a state contract to sell computer-networking equipment.
        Last year, Mr. Bruno appeared with Mr. Hevesi to announce an investment of $1.7 million from the state pension fund in another of Mr. Fassler's companies. Mr. McArdle said Mr. Bruno was not involved in securing the investment, and only joined in the announcement because the company was located in his district.
        In addition to stock investments, Mr. Bruno also owned an apartment house in Troy, initially taking his son, Joseph M. Bruno, as an investment partner in June 1999, according to county property records. But after a few months, the senator asked a close friend and local technology executive, Joseph Magno, to step in and replace his son as an owner and co-guarantor on a $235,000 bank loan related to the investment, Mr. Magno said yesterday. Mr. Magno agreed.
        The following year, Mr. Bruno secured $150,000 in state money to help start up the New York State Software Network, a trade association of technology firms that was headed by Mr. Magno.
        Mr. Magno, who became a lobbyist in 2004, said he was not involved in Mr. Bruno's decision to award money to his trade group. He added that he and the senator sold the apartment house in 2002 at a loss.
        ''Joe is a good man who's always asking if he can be helpful, but I always prefer to not accept his help,'' Mr. Magno said in a telephone interview. ''I try to stay away of him only because I understand the sensitivity of dealing with him because of his position and because we're friends.''
      