
        Insiders have long whispered among themselves about bogus ''prep schools'' where barely literate high school athletes launder their transcripts by taking pablum courses and sometimes by taking no courses at all. The athletes then go on to big-time sports universities, where they fail or exhaust their playing years before landing back on the streets without job prospects or college degrees.
        The prep school scheme was meant to circumvent academic qualification rules for college athletes laid out years ago by the National Collegiate Athletic Association. The N.C.A.A., which was slow to recognize the seriousness of the problem, has finally adopted policies to root it out. But those policies will not do the job unless the organization takes a hard-line approach with everyone involved, including powerhouse prep schools with friends in high places and college athletics departments that knowingly recruit students who do not meet academic guidelines.
        The prep school scheme sends a dangerous message to poor neighborhoods, where young people too often ignore their studies, believing that they will magically become millionaires once the world sees their athletic talents. Even worse, it encourages students to drop out of legitimate schools before graduation -- at which point their grade-point averages would be written in stone -- to sign up with fake schools that can help them rewrite their academic records.
        The N.C.A.A. has begun to scrutinize nontraditional schools for their academic programs and has actually decertified some. The organization has also stepped up its review of athletes' transcripts and will pay special attention to athletes who attended several schools, showed sudden and implausible jumps in grade-point average, transferred to another school late in the senior year or took an implausible number of courses in one semester.
        These measures are encouraging as far as they go. But the N.C.A.A. will need to wade much deeper into the problem if it hopes to break this scheme. For starters, it needs to make clear not just what courses high school athletes need to take to become eligible for college sports, but when they should take them. Until that happens, those who exploit young athletes will always be tempted to counterfeit the academic record at the last possible moment.
        Editorial
      