
        One day after losing Carmelo Anthony to a 15-game suspension, the Denver Nuggets took a gamble yesterday and added Allen Iverson, a fiercely competitive star whose scoring brilliance comes with controversy.
        In seeking that one player who could lift them to a championship in a competitive Western Conference, the Nuggets completed a trade with the Philadelphia 76ers that they had been hoping to make for the last 10 months. Denver gave up point guard Andre Miller, forward Joe Smith (attractive for his expiring $7 million contract) and two first-round draft picks in 2007. Denver also obtained the little-used forward Ivan McFarlin.
        At 31, Iverson was frustrated in his 11th season with the lowly 76ers and had asked to be traded 11 days ago. He is averaging 31.2 points a game and has three years and $57 million remaining on his contract.
        The Sixers (5-18) will look to rebuild by grabbing Ohio State's Greg Oden with a lottery pick.
        The Nuggets (13-9), in seventh place in the West, jolted the league by teaming Anthony with a second franchise player who happens to be a seven-time All-Star, an Olympian and a former most valuable player.
        ''We hope that these guys are going to be a dynamic duo together and take this franchise to new heights,'' Rex Chapman, Denver's vice president for player personnel, said yesterday at a news conference.
        Can Anthony, the league's leading scorer, and Iverson, the second-leading scorer, coexist? Can the Nuggets' combustible coach, George Karl, coexist with a player who hates to practice? It will largely depend on Iverson living up to his nickname: the Answer.
        ''Change is a scary thing in basketball, and are we rolling the dice? Sure we are,'' Chapman said. ''But I'll let George speak to that. Does he have trepidation? Sure. Is he excited? No question.''
        The financial risk for Denver is staggering. One day after being assessed a $500,000 fine by Commissioner David Stern for the team's role in the brawl last Saturday with the Knicks, the Nuggets could wind up paying close to $29 million in luxury-tax fees for Iverson. The organization hopes that Iverson can offset a small portion of that by attracting more fans.
        But, ultimately, as the Nuggets know, winning draws at the gate; chemistry is an uncertain issue with a team of young players and large egos.
        ''They're getting an all-N.B.A.-caliber player to team alongside Melo in his return,'' Toronto General Manager Bryan Colangelo said. ''To have one player that can literally win you a ballgame immediately puts you ahead of teams, but to have two players that can do that, that's going to make them formidable -- if they can find the right chemistry in a short amount of time.''
        Iverson has also clashed with virtually all his coaches, most recently Maurice Cheeks and most notably, Larry Brown, who guided him to a finals appearance in 2001 and later coached him at the 2004 Olympics. Karl, whose friendship with Brown and harsh feelings for Knicks Coach Isiah Thomas may have underlined Saturday's brawl at Madison Square Garden, has acknowledged speaking to Brown about coaching Iverson.
        Karl has had a similarly contentious yet encouraging relationship with his former point guards Gary Payton and Sam Cassell. At times he clashed with Anthony, and his rancor with Kenyon Martin helped induce the Nuggets' spiral in last season's playoffs.
        ''I was in Seattle when George had Gary Payton and Shawn Kemp, and I don't see it ending up different,'' Mark Warkentein, Denver's president for basketball operations, said in a news conference. ''This is not a block that George hasn't done. He's done laps around this block.''
        Iverson, who was expected to be in Denver today and to play Friday, said in a statement: ''I'm very happy about the trade. Denver's style of play fits my strengths. I'm looking forward to playing with Carmelo, the rest of the Denver Nuggets, and for George Karl, who is a proven winner.''
        The Nuggets are looking forward to his arrival as they will be without Anthony and the starting shooting guard, J. R. Smith, who has nine games left on his suspension from the brawl. Anthony is not scheduled to return until Jan. 20.
        Iverson's career could be characterized as tempestuous, if not impetuous, on and off the court. He was arrested twice: in 1997 for carrying a concealed weapon and marijuana -- he was sentenced to community service -- and in 2002 on domestic dispute charges involving his wife. Despite the incident attracting citywide attention, the charges were dropped.
        Iverson had vowed he was becoming a more mature family man (he has four children) and a better teammate. But he has also become known as one of the more selfish players on the court, someone who looks to shoot early and often, and because he is so competitive, he shows little patience in his teammates.
        Will there be enough shots for Anthony and Iverson? Chapman said he talked to Anthony. ''He's all in favor of this,'' Chapman said.
        On the flip side, given the scoring averages of Anthony and Iverson, that could make the Nuggets nearly impossible to guard.
        The Sixers' president, Billy King, called Iverson ''one of the greatest ever to play the game.''
        In his statement, Iverson said: ''I'd like to thank my fans in Philadelphia. They've been with me every step of the way, through all the ups and downs.''
        King said that the team was only trying to fulfill Iverson's request, but actually, he had been seeking a deal -- and talking to the Nuggets -- since February's trading deadline.
        The Nuggets had not included Smith in the deal until recently, and the Sixers had also wanted a young potential star, like Minnesota's Randy Foye or Boston's Al Jefferson.
        To make the trade work, the Nuggets had to give up the league's third-leading assist-maker (9.1) in Miller, who is in his eighth season, the past four in Denver. As much as King was pleased about acquiring Miller, he was looking more toward the future.
        ''When you take 31 points out of a unique player, that's hard,'' King said. ''But now we have to go back and re-evaluate and build a different way.''
        BASKETBALL
      