
        FOR about $100 a year, you won't have to take your shoes off at airport security. And it is possible that soon, you will not have to take your coat off, either.
        After a long evaluation, the Transportation Security Administration has approved technology at airport checkpoints that scans shoes for suspicious metal and any signs of potentially explosive material.
        But because of the high costs of the machines, the so-called shoe scanner will not be widely available for years at airport checkpoints. To get the benefit immediately, you have to be a member of the Registered Traveler program -- and specifically, a member of the Clear version of the program operated by Verified Identity Pass Inc., a company founded by the entrepreneur Steven Brill.
        Under the program, travelers who pay an annual fee and pass a federal background check receive biometrically encoded ID cards to use at special processing lanes at airports. While the traveler still has to pass through security, the special lane has a separate kiosk that verifies identity and, starting in January, will scan shoes, negating the need to take them off at the regular magnetometer.
        Critics have said that the program offers little value other than providing a dedicated lane to avoid long regular security lines -- a questionable exchange for giving up a measure of privacy by submitting to a background check. Approval of the shoe scanner is the first additional benefit the program can offer.
        Mr. Brill said that separate explosives-trace detection technology would soon be offered that will allow members to pass through a checkpoint without removing coats or outer garments. ''We have been told that the approval of the trace detector is a few weeks away,'' he said.
        Clear has been operating a Registered Traveler program at Orlando International Airport since August 2005. It has more than 33,000 members. The Clear lane at Orlando is marked by a distinctive kiosk where members have fingerprints and irises scanned for identity verification.
        The kiosks are also outfitted with shoe-scanner and explosives-trace devices developed by GE Security, a minority partner in Verified Identity Pass.
        The shoe scanner uses quadruple resonance technology, similar to a medical M.R.I. The explosives trace device, which is not yet approved by the T.S.A., ''takes a trace of your finger when you touch the screen and sniffs that for any sign of any one of 200 different chemicals that are associated with explosives,'' Mr. Brill said.
        All three technologies -- ID verification, shoe scanner and trace detective -- are built into the compact Clear airport kiosk.
        In surveys, frequent travelers say that the requirement to remove shoes is the most disliked rule at checkpoints. Having to remove coats and outer garments is second. Female travelers especially dislike that requirement because the definition of what is an outer garment is less clear for women than for men.
        Technology to address the third-most-disliked checkpoint requirement, having to remove laptops from cases, should become available next year, Mr. Brill said.
        As benefits become clearer and interest grows, rivals have jumped in, though none with the head start that Mr. Brill's company has. One competitor, Unisys, expects to open its version of the program early next spring at Reno/Tahoe International Airport, and to expand it to other airports shortly.
        Unisys, which already has in place electronic systems for worker ID verification at major airports, was an original developer of the Registered Traveler program when it operated as a pilot project at several major airports in 2004, before Mr. Brill's company opened the first official station in Orlando.
        Another potential rival is the Saflink Corporation, which has said it plans to start a version of the program called Flo (for Fast Lane Option) with Microsoft and others.
        About three dozen major airports have told the T.S.A. they are considering adopting the program. But some airlines oppose it, partly because they fear it will detract from elite-access lines they provide top customers, and partly because in many airports, airlines control all of the floor space leading to the checkpoints and are loath to give up any real estate.
        Despite the advances in technology, the program has been sluggish in its rollout. This month, Mr. Brill, said that the first expansion beyond Orlando would occur today at Terminal 7 at Kennedy International Airport in a marketing partnership with British Airways.
        But processing of members took longer than anticipated, he said. ''We are now officially launching J.F.K. the 3rd or the 4th of January. Then, in succession, we'll open one week after the other -- Indianapolis on the 11th, San Jose on the 18th, and Cincinnati on the 25th, and right after that a couple of other airports that I can't mention yet.''
        OFF THE ROAD
        Correction:  December 23, 2006, Saturday  The ''On the Road'' column in Business Day on Tuesday about changes at airport security checkpoints misstated the technology used in shoe scanners. It is quadrupole resonance technology, which is similar to a medical M.R.I. -- not quadruple resonance.
      