
        The Knicks were an unmitigated mess last night. Then they were not. Then they were brilliant. Then they were not. Had these events happened in reverse order, Madison Square Garden might have collapsed under the weight of the anger and frustration. As it happened, everyone left with a confused mix of awe and despondency.
        The awe was drawn from a second half in which the Knicks ferociously whittled a 30-point deficit to 3 against the stunned Boston Celtics. The distress came from the final score -- a 97-90 loss -- but mostly from seeing the Knicks fall behind by 30 in the first place.
        When the final buzzer sounded, there were only a few boos, the crowd of 16,621 perhaps having gone hoarse from cheering wildly for the previous hour.
        Even Coach Isiah Thomas, who habitually scripts positive themes in defeat, could not mask his disillusionment.
        ''I don't think I've been more disappointed in a loss than this one,'' he said.
        His postgame interview was littered with long pauses and words like baffled and puzzling.
        The Knicks headed into the night with visions of first place in the Atlantic Division, which they could have taken with a victory and a Nets loss. But they did not appear to be up to the task, falling behind by double digits in the first six minutes and by 27 in the second quarter. So they ended the night in third place, with an 8-15 record and a 2-3 mark to start a six-game homestand.
        James L. Dolan, the Garden chairman, who has given Thomas a one-year ultimatum to win, watched his team at its best and at its worst from his baseline seat. His slouching posture and grim expression never changed.
        The end was fitting, marked by confusion and unforced errors. The Knicks missed 9 of 18 free throws in the final quarter and committed 3 turnovers. Eddy Curry scored a team-high 30 points (his 10th consecutive game with at least 20) and had 12 rebounds. But he missed 5 of 11 free throws in the final quarter.
        Yet the Knicks still had a chance, trailing by 93-90 with a little more than a minute to play. Jared Jeffries, making his Knicks debut, blocked Paul Pierce's layup attempt with 1 minute 12 seconds remaining. But the Knicks' next possession ended with Stephon Marbury throwing a pass that glanced off Quentin Richardson's hands and out of bounds.
        On their final meaningful possession, Jamal Crawford missed a runner and Curry missed a tip-in. Pierce made two free throws with 17 seconds left to seal the victory. He finished with 31 points.
        Richardson and Marbury said they misread each other. Richardson, guarded by the shorter Delonte West, had wanted to go in the post, but Curry was already there. Marbury said he thought Richardson would step back and take the pass, then feed Curry.
        ''Just a miscommunication,'' Richardson said, adding, ''I took my eyes off the ball.''
        Playing without two injured starters (Wally Szczerbiak and Kendrick Perkins), the Celtics made 60 percent of their shots on the way to a 61-36 halftime lead. Pierce had 19 points in 18 minutes and hardly broke a sweat. The crowd's loudest ovation to that point was given to an English soccer player -- Manchester United's Wayne Rooney, who was sitting courtside.
        The deficit grew to 68-38 in the opening minutes of the third quarter before the Knicks got untracked. David Lee sparked the rally with a 3-point play, and Crawford followed with two 3-pointers. Soon, Curry got moving too (he had 18 points after halftime). The deficit was 15 heading into the fourth, and down to single digits a few minutes later when Nate Robinson hit a driving layup.
        Marbury watched most of the fourth-quarter push from the bench. He had trouble staying with the Celtics' quick young guards and after he missed wide right on a 3-point attempt, Thomas pulled him in favor of Robinson. The crowd cheered the move. When Marbury returned with 3:12 to play, he was booed.
        ''I've just got to continue to play,'' said Marbury, who finished with 15 points and 3 assists. ''I'm not going to allow that to affect how I'm going to go out and play basketball. I've been doing this for a long time.''
        Jeffries, who spent the past two months recovering from a broken wrist, played his first game as a Knick and looked tentative early. After missing a couple shots, including an errant jumper, Jeffries tore off the tape and brace from his left wrist and tossed it on the sideline.
        Jeffries also absorbed a hard foul from Sebastian Telfair and landed on the wrist without a problem. He came out for the second half with a smaller brace on the wrist and a lot more pep in his stride.
        He was active around the rim at both ends of the court and had a huge block of a shot by Jefferson in the fourth quarter. Jeffries finished with 7 points, 5 rebounds, 2 blocked shots and a steal.
        REBOUNDS
        While repeating his public stance on not trading for Philadelphia's Allen Iverson, Knicks Coach Isiah Thomas said he would not make any other radical moves.
        PRO BASKETBALL
      