
        A convicted murderer was put to death by lethal injection on Wednesday, but he took more than a half-hour to die and required a second dose of the chemicals, prompting Gov. Jeb Bush to call for a review of the execution.
        The convict, Angel N. Diaz, 55, was pronounced dead at 6:36 p.m., 34 minutes after receiving the first lethal injection at the Florida State Prison in Starke, 23 miles northeast of Gainesville. Normally, death occurs within 15 minutes.
        Witnesses said Mr. Diaz appeared to be moving after the first injection was administered, seemingly squinting and grimacing, at times appearing to mouth words.
        On Thursday, James R. McDonough, secretary of the state's Department of Corrections, asked for an expedited autopsy and appointed a team of law enforcement and medical professionals to investigate the execution, at the request of Governor Bush.
        ''I think it's appropriate to do so, given the unusual length of time it took for the process to complete,'' Mr. Bush told reporters. ''I'm concerned enough to ask Secretary McDonough to put together a team to review it thoroughly and quickly, but I don't know if anything was done outside of the protocol.''
        Gretl Plessinger, a spokeswoman for the Department of Corrections, said Mr. Diaz was administered a second dose because he suffered from liver disease, which slowed his metabolism.
        ''It was not unanticipated that the metabolism of drugs delivered would take additional time,'' Ms. Plessinger said.
        A lawyer for Mr. Diaz filed suit on Thursday with the Florida Supreme Court on behalf of death row inmates, asking the court to rule that the state's lethal injection procedure is unconstitutional.
        Opponents of the death penalty, who have long called the cocktail of chemicals cruel and unusual punishment, criticized the execution and the state's death penalty system.
        ''This is further proof of the broken death penalty system in Florida,'' Mark Elliott, a spokesman for Floridians for Alternatives to the Death Penalty, said. ''Florida has no business in executions.''
        This week, the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit denied Mr. Diaz's motions for a stay of execution.
        Mr. Diaz's appeal to the United States Supreme Court challenging the chemicals used by the state in administering the lethal injection was rejected shortly before his execution.
        Florida switched to lethal injection in 2000 after flames shot from an inmate's head during his execution by electric chair.
        The state uses a combination of three chemicals in lethal injection, one to anesthetize the inmate, a second to paralyze the body and a third to stop the heart.
        Mr. Diaz was convicted in the 1979 murder of Joseph Nagy, the manager at a topless bar in Miami that Mr. Diaz and an accomplice were accused of robbing.
        In his final statement, Mr. Diaz insisted on his innocence.
        ''The State of Florida is committing a crime, because I am innocent,'' Mr. Diaz, who was from Puerto Rico, said in Spanish. ''The death penalty is not only a form of vengeance, but it is also a cowardly act by humans.''
      