
        IT appeared at 11:16 p.m. I know, because my husband and I were watching Jon Stewart, whom I adore, but he and Samuel L. Jackson were doing one of those fake high-hilarity riffs, and Al said, ''Let's turn it off,'' so we did, and the TV blinked 11:16, and then it appeared.
        Appeared? It swooped across the ceiling and dove toward the bed. I cried out. In the circumstance it was a perfectly reasonable cry, although Al calls it the most blood-curdling scream he ever heard.
        ''A bat!'' he said. (Cried out, actually.) He began swiping at it with a towel.
        A bat! I ducked beneath the sheet. ''Are you sure?'' I mean, how likely is this? In a sixth-floor bedroom on Central Park West?
        ''Positive.'' Silence, but for the whish of the towel. Then: ''Ah, wait. It's landed.''
        I peeked out. The bat sat high on a wall. With its wings folded, it looked less scary. You wouldn't call it cute, but less scary. Al got on a chair, took a swipe, teetered and fell backward. Then I did scream. I pictured the headline in the tabs. ''Man Breaks Back Battling Bat.'' He was unhurt, but loaded now for bear; for bat. He charged with the towel. The bat swept, laughing, into the hallway, and Al shut the bedroom door and collapsed, panting (''West Sider Has Coronary Battling Bat''), upon the bed.
        ''I'll call 311 in the morning,'' he said.
        Why 311?
        ''All city calls are 311 now. It's one big funnel.''
        We slept, but not restfully. You remember those scary childhood stories of bats getting tangled in your hair? I dreamed them.
        8:05 a.m.: I say, ''Let's call 311 from here.''
        Al says, ''I will not be confined to my bedroom by a bat,'' and goes forth to hunt it down.
        Do I stay in the bedroom? You have to ask?
        Hunt is long and fruitless.
        9:01: Al calls 311. 311 tells him that he must call Animal Control.
        9:05: Al calls Animal Control. Animal Control says, ''Where is the bat now?'' Al says, ''I can't find it.'' Animal Control explains that complainant must find the bat, adding, ''We can come get it, but we can't look for it.''
        9:15: Al consults the Yellow Pages, calls an exterminator. The machine answers. It says leave a message and have a nice day. Leaving aside the question of how nice a day it can be if one is calling an exterminator at 9:15 a.m., Al leaves a message.
        10:01: Al goes to find the building super. I call (from the bedroom) the Museum of Natural History. A recording asks, What department? ''Birds,'' I say, and am connected to Ornithology. Ornithology does not contain her mirth. ''Bats aren't birds,'' she chortles. ''I'll transfer you to Mammalogy. They love this stuff. They'll love helping you.''
        Not so. Mammalogy is not as friendly as Ornithology. Mammalogy asks, Are windows open? Yes, but screened. (One is unscreened, in a recently occupied guest room. If that is how the bat got in, and it must be, it has been with us, silent, unseen, for three days. This spooks me.)
        ''Tch!'' Mammalogy says. ''Remove the screens! If you see it, try not to frighten it.'' Is she kidding? ''Throw a towel over it. Then you can throw it out the window.''
        ''My husband tried a towel last night. He couldn't get anywhere near it.''
        ''Of course not.'' Of course not, dummy. ''They have echolocation.'' (Webster's: ''A process that is used by an animal (as a bat) to orient itself and avoid obstacles '') ''Open windows wide. And remember, it doesn't like being with you any more than you like being with it.''
        10:20: I call the Police Department. They are kindly but regretful. ''We can't help you.'' ''Who can?'' ''Animal Control.'' Sensing a certain circularity here, I say thank you and hang up.
        10:25: Al returns. The super is not on the premises. It is a Friday, and he has left for his country house.
        11:10: The exterminator calls. Al explains. The exterminator says: ''We don't do bats. Call the Fire Department.'' For a bat? ''Sure. Why not? They always take those cats out of trees.''
        11:30: The larder is extremely low. Al departs alone to do the weekly marketing at Fairway. I crack open the bedroom door, and wish him Godspeed.
        12:15 p.m.: I call the police again. This time I lay it on. ''Animal Control said my husband has to find it, but last night he was breathing very hard, and I got really scared '' ''O.K., listen,'' she says. ''Don't tell anyone I told you this ----'' She is a honey, a jewel. ''---- But what you do is, tell Animal Control you found it. You see it. Then they'll come. You get what I'm saying here?''
        12:20: I do. Animal Control says they will be here forthwith.
        12:20: At Fairway, Al sees firefighters. You always see firefighters there, in full regalia, marketing for the firehouse -- ''These peaches look so nice, let's make a cobbler.''
        Al inquires. The firefighters, like everyone else, are vastly amused. ''That's what they always tell you,'' one says. ''Call the Fire Department.'' If only we had a cat up a tree.
        12:35: I am buzzed from the lobby. In the absence of the super, Joe and Ralph, from the building staff, are coming to look for the bat. Which means I must open the door. By splendid coincidence I have a cane, having sustained a minor tibial fracture recently, and I proceed with this cane down the hallway, ready to swing at anything that swings at me.
        Joe and Ralph move every heavy piece of furniture, of which there is a lot. They swipe fly swatters behind pictures and above wall moldings. They clap hands and bang walls. Nothing.
        12:50: Al comes home and joins the fray. Still nothing.
        1:55: Animal Control arrives. Where is it? he asks. ''There,'' I lie, pointing. He searches. He shrugs and says, ''All we can do is come back if you see it again.'' Translation: Keep in touch.
        It is now after 2 p.m. The bat has not been seen for 15 hours. I begin to believe that we imagined it. But if it was here, it must still be here. Somewhere.
        6:30: Screens out, windows open, we leave for a dinner date. Soon after 10, we return.
        ''You wait here,'' Al says in the outer foyer. My hero.
        He enters, cases the joint and waves me in. Is it gone? Who knows? Bats, I am told, can linger and hide for days, as this one did upon arrival. I can only say that its absence is consummately to be desired, because, if it shows up again, God knows what city agency we can call.
        NEW YORK OBSERVED Martha Weinman Lear is the author of ''Where Did I Leave My Damn Glasses?,'' a book about memory to be published next year by Warner Books.
      