
        When the Democrats won their new one-vote majority in the Senate last month, they could point to any number of factors: anger about the war, an unpopular president, record fund-raising.
        When it looked as if they might lose that majority this week, there was just one culprit: a tangle of malformed blood vessels developed in utero nearly 60 years ago in the brain of a future senator.
        But if the drama highlighted just how fragile a fragile majority can be, it also highlighted the quirks of fate in the unusual demographics of the Senate. Perhaps the surprising thing about its being Senator Tim Johnson who was hospitalized and in the center of a political storm about Senate succession is that it was Senator Tim Johnson.
        After all, the world's greatest deliberative body -- even senators often say this with an eye roll -- is also one of the world's most geriatric. Or more politely put, least age discriminatory. And at age 59, Mr. Johnson is one of the young 'uns.
        The membership of the Senate that adjourned this month was the oldest ever, on average, and the one that takes office next month will break that record, with an average age of 62.
        But that number obscures just how senior some of the senior statesmen are. Two in their 80s, Senators Frank R. Lautenberg of New Jersey and Ted Stevens of Alaska, are planning to run again in two years, as are John W. Warner of Virginia, a relatively young 79, and Pete Domenici of New Mexico, a pup at 74.
        The oldest senator, 89-year-old Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, was first elected six years before the youngest, John E. Sununu of New Hampshire, was born in 1964. Mr. Byrd, a Democrat, won re-election this fall despite Republican efforts to show him as frail, with, among other things, a videotape of him appearing to doze at his desk on the Senate floor.
        Though Mr. Byrd walks with two metal canes, even his Republican colleagues salute his feistiness, mental acuity and ability to deliver his annual holiday addresses -- occasionally after younger lawmakers have gone home to bed. (All this might be explained by a conversation overheard in a Senate cafeteria this summer, where an aide pressed workers about when they might stock more Red Bull. ''Senator Byrd likes it, too,'' he explained.)
        Can it be any wonder that John McCain does not seem deterred by suggestions that at 70, a year older than Ronald Reagan was when he took office, he is too old to run for president in 2008?
        Age would seem to matter more now. With the national electorate so evenly divided, Senate majorities could be increasingly fragile, increasingly dependent on one heartbeat or party switch.
        The last time the Senate was so narrowly divided was in 2001, when it was 50-50 until James M. Jeffords of Vermont caucused with the Democrats to give them a 51-49 edge, the same margin they will have in January. It had not been so close since 1953, and before that, since 1881.
        Still, few people on Capitol Hill discuss age when talking about the political balance. That is partly because the more senior members seem for the most part so healthy. Mr. Warner, after staying at a rally until the early morning hours on election night, declared while walking through a Capitol hallway the next afternoon that he had still not slept.
        And life, of course, unfolds unexpectedly. ''Strom Thurmond lived to be 100, and Paul Wellstone died in a plane crash in midlife,'' said Don Ritchie, the associate Senate historian. ''There's no scenario that's predictable.''
        The real question, too, is how the senators would be replaced if they died or quit. For the most part, a state's governor gets to appoint a replacement. That is what riveted the Capitol to Mr. Johnson's situation; the governor of his state, South Dakota, is a Republican.
        Going into the new Congress, there will be 29 states where at least one senator belongs to a different party than the governor. Mr. Domenici and Mr. Warner are among these.
        And a few of those states, like Hawaii -- where the governor is a Republican and the two 82-year-old senators, Daniel K. Inouye and Daniel K. Akaka, are Democrats -- require the governor to name a replacement of the same party as that of the departing senator.
        Of course, all of this assumes that someone does die or quit because of incapacity. Modern medicine could make it increasingly likely that people simply hang on.
        There is nothing in the Senate rules, Mr. Ritchie said, about when a senator in poor health must step down. By precedent, it is left up to the senator to decide. Even in the case of severe debilitation, history is full of examples of senators who were absent with serious health problems but continued to serve.
        Carter Glass, a Democrat from Virginia, was absent from the Senate because of a heart ailment from 1942 until his death in 1946. He even retained his chairmanship of the powerful Appropriations Committee, despite newspaper editorials calling for him to resign.
        And a previous senator from South Dakota, Karl Mundt, suffered a paralytic stroke and was absent from November 1969 to January 1973, when his term expired. Mr. Mundt had offered to resign, Mr. Ritchie said, but only if his wife was named to replace him. The governor, like Mr. Mundt a Republican, refused.
        In one case in the House, the family of Representative Gladys Noon Spellman of Maryland decided to declare her seat vacant after she fell into a coma in 1980. But the Senate rarely follows House precedent.
        With all that considered, what would happen if the Senate went 50-50? In general, the vice president breaks tie votes. Every time the Senate has been close, the vice president has been a Republican.
        But much would depend on how the two parties agreed to organize the chamber. In 1953, an independent, Wayne Morse of Oregon, agreed to vote with the Republicans to give them a majority (he moved a chair to the middle aisle for a day, to emphasize his official status.)
        Nine senators died in that session, including the Republican majority leader, Mr. Ritchie said, giving the Democrats more votes at several points. But in resolutions that outlined control of committees at the outset of the session, the parties had not included any provisions for what would happen if one or the other unexpectedly got a numerical advantage. So the Senate remained in Republican control.
        By 2001, the parties had learned from the past. Or so they thought. The body, as elected, was 50-50.
        Republicans and Democrats worked out an arrangement that if, in the two-year session, one or the other party got an extra seat, the committee ratios would favor the party with the majority.
        At the time, Mr. Ritchie said, the assumption was that this would help Republicans. While Mr. Thurmond, at 99, was a Republican and came from a state with a Democratic governor, most recent party switches had been Democrat to Republican.
        ''Nobody really expected what happened,'' Mr. Ritchie said.
        Mr. Thurmond lived on. And it was a Republican, Mr. Jeffords, who switched sides.
        POLITICAL MEMO
      