
        For Isiah Thomas, the state of Indiana provided a stage to prove his greatness. For Jared Jeffries, it was a place to grow. Thomas is a Hoosier by collegiate affiliation, Jeffries by birthright.
        There is something poetic then about the Knicks beginning the next phase of their season in Indiana (state motto: ''The Crossroads of America''), with Thomas and Jeffries seeking validation and comfort.
        Thomas, the Knicks' coach, got a boost from ownership this week, but he needs a boost in the standings more. Jeffries made his Knicks' debut this week. If two games are any indication, he could help save Thomas's job.
        The Knicks signed Jeffries last summer to shore up their defense and, in Thomas's words, to ''balance the team.'' Jeffries showed those gifts in Monday's near-comeback against Boston and in Wednesday's victory over Atlanta.
        ''His imprint is definitely on both games, defensively,'' said Thomas, who, like Jeffries, played at Indiana University. Jeffries is a native of Bloomington, home of the Hoosiers.
        At 9-15, the Knicks are pining for victories and running out of alibis. They are past the '' Woe Is the Schedule'' part of the season (November) and are nearly done with the ''Woe Is the Roster'' portion (Jeffries is back and Channing Frye should be soon).
        For weeks, Thomas pointed to Jeffries's return as a potential turning point. It was a heavy burden to place on a defensive specialist with a broken wrist, but Jeffries did not flinch.
        In two games, Jeffries is averaging 11 points, 6 rebounds, 2 steals and 1 block. Thomas made him the starting power forward in just his second game back. Jeffries's baseline-to-baseline energy factored greatly in the Knicks' 94-82 rout of Atlanta.
        ''Defensively, he's such a weapon,'' Thomas said. ''He gives you so many ways to play. His defensive presence out on the floor, he's able to guard anybody. He can take the best scorer out on the perimeter, he can take the best scorer inside the post, block shots, rebound, he can initiate the break. He's a luxury to have right now.''
        Jeffries started at power forward Wednesday and later played at small forward. Jeffries can also play center and both guard positions, giving Thomas great flexibility.
        For the first time in Thomas's three years as team president, the Knicks have two accomplished defenders in the lineup, Quentin Richardson and Jeffries. Thomas plans to keep it that way, which means that Frye -- who could return this weekend from a sprained ankle -- might play off the bench. Alternatively, Thomas could use Frye at power forward and shift Richardson to the backcourt to play alongside Stephon Marbury.
        Thomas has said that Jeffries could become an All-Defensive Team player. While David Lee gave the Knicks toughness as the temporary starter at power forward, Thomas said using Jeffries and Richardson together ''gives us a defensive ability that we didn't have in the previous games.''
        There are limitations to the current lineup. Jeffries has the height (6 feet 11 inches) of a power forward, but not the brawn. He could have trouble with the league's stronger power forwards, starting with the Pacers' Jermaine O'Neal.
        ''It's all positioning,'' Jeffries said. ''I just keep my feet moving and stay in position. And if he lowers his shoulder, go down, take a charge.''
        The other concern with Jeffries is his poor shooting. Frye's midrange jumper stretches defenses, but opposing power forwards will have no problem leaving Jeffries to double-team Eddy Curry in the post. The Hawks swarmed Curry on Wednesday, holding him to 20 points, his lowest output in nine games.
        ''That's something we've got to work on, but Jared's a hard worker,'' Curry said. ''I'm sure as soon as he gets comfortable with that hand, he's going to definitely knock down some shots for us.''
        Both Thomas and Jeffries spoke enthusiastically about returning to Indiana. For Thomas, this memory lane has two tracks. His launched his Hall of Fame playing career in Bloomington in 1981, and he got his first coaching job with the Pacers in 2000.
        Thomas said he sees strong parallels between his current Knicks' roster and the Pacers' team he inherited six years ago. O'Neal was a young big man just starting to emerge as a top-tier player. Ron Artest, acquired a year later, was a budding defensive stopper. After losing in the 2000 finals to the Lakers, the Pacers were rebuilding on the fly with youth.
        ''It was a team in transition, a team that had dismantled, starting all over again,'' Thomas said. ''And we were in a very similar situation as here, almost identical.''
        Then, as now, Indiana is where Thomas starts again.
        REBOUNDS
        If Eddy Curry makes the All-Star team, he will almost certainly be a reserve pick. In the first balloting returns released Thursday, Curry did not rank among the top 10 centers in the Eastern Conference. Miami's Shaquille O'Neal, who has played just four games because of injury, topped the list, with 522,815 votes from the fans. He was followed by Orlando's Dwight Howard, Chicago's Ben Wallace and Miami's Alonzo Mourning. As of Thursday, Curry led all Eastern Conference centers in scoring average (18.3 points). He ranked eighth in rebounds (7.6) and third in field-goal percentage (55.4). Fan voting continues online through Jan. 21. The All-Star reserves are chosen by the coaches.
        PRO BASKETBALL
      