
        In a league consumed with winning every game, and playing a position defined by punishment, N.F.L. running backs are in the business of producing now and worrying about the consequences later. That equation could spell trouble for Larry Johnson.
        Tonight, Johnson will face the Chargers and LaDainian Tomlinson in a matchup of the league's top two running backs. They are separated by 5 rushing yards, but Johnson, with 48 more carries than Tomlinson, is working much harder for them.
        At his current pace, Johnson would finish with 410 carries, tying the former Falcon Jamal Anderson's record for carries in a season. It is a pace that has shortened the careers for most running backs who have approached it.
        Other sports have worked to increase their stars' longevity, often by limiting their work. Baseball managers, for instance, pay careful attention to pitch counts.
        It's a different story in the N.F.L. Running backs are often asked to potentially sacrifice their careers for the good of the team. And few, especially the running backs themselves, seem to mind.
        Look no further than Anderson for the high price of a 400-carry season. In 1998, he amassed 1,846 yards from those 410 carries and helped lift his team to the Super Bowl. But the next season, he played in only two games because of injuries, and he never exceeded 300 carries again. By 2002, he was out of the N.F.L.
        Johnson could be courting the same fate. Chiefs Coach Herman Edwards, when asked about Johnson's workload after the team's win over the Broncos on Nov. 23, told reporters: ''I'm not going to wear him out. That's what good runners want. They want the ball.''
        When pressed further, he said: ''He wants the ball that many times. It's not like he's walking around here saying, 'I'm carrying the ball too much.' ''
        Twenty running backs have carried the ball 375 or more times in a season, and as a whole their carries the next season dropped by 34.1 percent. The number is even higher for the four who have carried the ball more than 400 times, with their total dropping 39.5 percent the next season.
        When asked why a top running back would be used to such an extent, Giants running back Tiki Barber said: ''I think it's one of two things. From a team perspective, it's almost as if, 'We're not guaranteed to have him healthy all the time, so let's get our use out of him.' But that's almost congruent to the player's perspective because you think, 'I could be out of the game or hurt tomorrow; let me do as much as I can now.' ''
        Johnson's former coach, Dick Vermeil, showed atypical restraint with the number of carries his star runners received. In his career, Vermeil worked with Wilbert Montgomery, Marshall Faulk, Priest Holmes and Johnson and yet had just five seasons in which his top running back had more than 300 carries, with Priest Holmes accounting for three of them.
        Although he rarely overworked running backs, he said coaches were making the right decision by sticking with their starter.
        ''If you've already clinched your division and the best playoff position, then you can afford to take your best players out,'' Vermeil said. ''But until you do that, you have to keep them in there playing to do everything you can to enhance your playoff position.''
        There seems to be little concern that a player can't be replaced. As Barber recalled, ''One of my running backs coaches used to joke that they should put a sign outside of our locker room saying, 'Hiring all positions.' ''
        Barber, who carried the ball 357 times last season and caught 54 passes, said, ''At the end of the year, my body was the worst it had ever felt and that was one of the reasons why I really started contemplating retirement.''
        One obvious way to reduce the workload for starting running backs is to increase the number of carries given to backups. In the case of the Chargers, with Tomlinson and the backup Michael Turner, or the Jaguars, with the starter Fred Taylor and the backup Maurice Jones-Drew, that combination works well, but it is not generally popular with coaches or players.
        ''I always felt that when you take your starting running back out of the ballgame, more often than not you're shifting into second gear,'' Vermeil said. ''You never know what play is going to be the big play for the great running back. But if he's on the bench, you know he's not going to make it.''
        A second way to reduce the workload would be to limit carries in garbage time.
        In a Nov. 5 game against the Rams, Johnson had 27 carries for 172 yards and a touchdown. With the team leading, 31-17, in the fourth quarter, and 1 minute 48 seconds to play, Johnson took the field for the final drive and ran the ball three times for a total of six yards.
        ''There is some level of pride or prestige to lead the league in rushing or have a 200-yard day instead of a 180-yard day,'' Barber said. ''So you take those extra five carries and it all combines into an increasing number of carries on the season.''
        Vermeil, now an analyst for the NFL Network, does not understand the motivations of a coach who allows his player to risk injury for personal gain. He said, ''I know in the same situation more often than not I would have my key guy on the bench.''
        Barber says it's a mind-set that is not going to change anytime soon. ''Every year somebody new comes in or a potential new star is there and so you have to live for now,'' he said.
        Barber recalled a situation in 2000, when he was injured in the second-to-last week of the season and found out a week later that he had broken his arm. Facing surgery, he told the doctors to wait so he could help his team's Super Bowl chances. He played with the broken arm and the team reached the Super Bowl, losing to the Ravens.
        ''People have said, 'Wow, you played with a broken arm, you must be brave,' '' he said, laughing. ''Well, I'm either brave or stupid. At the time I was brave, in retrospect I was stupid. Because of the mentality that it takes to play this game, you do stupid stuff because you want to win. Your pride takes over and it squashes all reason.''
        KEEPING SCORE E-mail: keepingscore@nytimes.com
      