
        Earlier this week, in a small room on Rikers Island, three men in business suits gathered around a table to present a prisoner named Joshua Rivera with a proposal full of torments and opportunities that could reshape the map of his life.
        Mr. Rivera -- who has insisted that he was a victim of mistaken identity ever since he was accused and convicted in the 1992 murder of a man in Woodside, Queens -- had recently found powerful, if not conclusive, support for his claim.
        And suddenly, after years of insisting that he belonged behind bars for life, the Queens district attorney's office was offering Mr. Rivera an extraordinary chance to get out of prison early, according to a boyhood friend and former Queens prosecutor, Sherman Jackson.
        All Mr. Rivera had to do was enter a special form of guilty plea that did not require him to actually admit to the crime. At age 36, he could leave prison after 13 years and restart his life -- a free man, but also a convicted murderer.
        His alternative was to continue to fight to clear his name from behind bars, at the risk of spending 24 more years there to finish his original sentence.
        As Mr. Rivera weighed the prosecutor's new proposal, presented to him in the jailhouse meeting on Tuesday by his lawyer, Christopher Renfroe, each prospect presented its own obvious agonies, according to Mr. Jackson.
        ''He was crying,'' Mr. Jackson said. ''I told him if he took the plea, he couldn't pursue a civil suit for compensation for wrongful conviction, and he said, 'If I can go home tomorrow, I don't care about the money.' ''
        Yet neither was Mr. Rivera prepared to surrender his assertion of innocence. In the meeting, Mr. Rivera recalled that he had rejected a plea bargain more than a decade ago, according to Mr. Jackson.
        He asked that a message be sent to Daniel A. Saunders, the senior Queens prosecutor now handling his case.
        ''He said, 'They offered me seven to 21 before I went to trial if I pleaded guilty. Tell Mr. Saunders I didn't take it because I'm innocent, and I don't want to take this because I am innocent,' '' Mr. Jackson said. ''But he's wavering. He's losing sleep.''
        Mr. Saunders, the prosecutor, declined to comment. Mr. Renfroe, the defense lawyer, did not return a call for comment.
        Mr. Rivera is due back today in Supreme Court in Queens, where Justice Robert C. McGann is presiding over a hearing on his claim that the newly discovered evidence is strong enough to overturn his conviction and win him another trial.
        On Sept. 19, 1992, Paul Peralta and Leonard Aquino were standing in front of a building at 47-25 48th Street, sipping beers, when two men jumped out of a car. Almost immediately one of them opened fire. Mr. Aquino was killed. Mr. Peralta, who was wounded, identified Mr. Rivera as the gunman. Based on testimony from Mr. Peralta and another witness, Mr. Rivera was convicted.
        Mr. Rivera continued to insist that he was not involved in the attack, and he wrote to Queens prosecutors in 2003, suggesting new leads. Investigators then found two men who said that they had unwittingly driven the real killer to the scene. While acknowledging their own connections to the murder, the two men said unequivocally that Mr. Rivera was not present or involved.
        One of those men testified behind closed doors on Nov. 30, saying that he had been haunted by the shooting every day since.
        The man, Jaime Acevedo, who was described by the authorities as a law-abiding, responsible working person, said he had been driving to clubs in Manhattan that evening with a friend and two acquaintances. At the end of the night, he testified last month, he was asked by one of the acquaintances to make a stop in Woodside, unaware that the man would get out and start shooting.
        Mr. Saunders asked him if he had been paid for his testimony. Mr. Acevedo said he had not been.
        The prosecutors say that a jailhouse informant claims to have overheard Mr. Rivera telling someone that he was paying a witness to help his cause.
        But Mr. Jackson said that notion is laughable. ''Joshua does not have a nickel in his commissary account,'' he said.
        Mr. Peralta, the surviving victim of the shooting, also testified on Nov. 30 that he was no longer sure that it was Mr. Rivera he glimpsed in the seconds before the shooting. Mr. Saunders, though, suggested that those doubts had been newly planted by the inquiry into the conviction.
        In court last month, Mr. Saunders told Judge McGann that Mr. Rivera should have located the same witnesses soon after he was arrested, and that his failure to do so means that the judge cannot consider the evidence as ''newly discovered.''
        Even so, Mr. Saunders said, if the prosecutors came to believe that Mr. Rivera was not involved, they would move to drop the conviction.
      