
        Rich Gossage signed with the Yankees as a free agent 29 years ago, and his answer to a question at a news conference remains one of the more honest, more candid responses any player has ever uttered.
        Why did you sign with the Yankees? Gossage was asked.
        ''Because my agent told me to,'' he said.
        If only players could be so forthright today. When Mike Hampton left the Mets six years ago and signed a long-term, lucrative contract with the Colorado Rockies, he said he chose the Rockies in part because of the schools in the Denver suburbs.
        The $121 million? He didn't mention it.
        It's never the money. No one ever seems to sign with a team because it offers the most money. Players seek the best deal, the most money they can get, so why can't they acknowledge it once they sign? They should be thrilled that they succeeded in their quest. Instead, they think it will make them sound crass to talk about the money.
        Three years ago, Andy Pettitte left the Yankees as a free agent after nine playoff-filled seasons and went to Houston, where he lives. The Yankees had blundered, treating Pettitte too cavalierly before deciding too late that maybe they did want him to stay.
        Spotting a possible fissure, the Astros leapt at the chance to snare Pettitte and signed him to a three-year, $31.5 million contract. Eventually, the Yankees offered him $39 million for three years, but only the first two years were guaranteed.
        In any case, Pettitte wanted significantly more money to stay in New York. The Yankees weren't going to give it to him, and by then, it didn't matter. Pettitte had committed to play for the Astros, deciding it was important to play at home.
        Three years later, home apparently doesn't mean quite as much. The Yankees offered $16 million with a player option for a second year at $16 million. Pettitte would have presumably stayed with the Astros if they had raised their $12 million offer to $14 million and had given him the same player option for a second season. But the Astros didn't accept the proposal, and Pettitte is returning to the Yankees.
        What happened to home? It seemed to get lost among the dollar signs, although Randy Hendricks, Pettitte's agent, rejected that suggestion over the weekend.
        Why was playing at home so important to Pettitte three years ago, I asked Hendricks in an e-mail message this weekend, if he was willing to sacrifice it for an extra $2 million in 2007 after he had earned more than $30 million the past three years?
        Whenever economics and geography clash, I think of Ron Shapiro. He is a veteran agent who has often acted unlike most other agents. He thinks about his clients' emotional comfort as well as their financial health. Kirby Puckett and Cal Ripken are the two players who stand out in my mind.
        ''We had to go into the free-agent market, but Kirby wanted to remain in Minnesota,'' Shapiro said Sunday. ''We did a brief tour, went to Philadelphia and Boston, a few others. We were offered magnitudes of money more than Minnesota offered. We didn't even counter any of the offers.''
        The Red Sox' offer, Shapiro said, was $1 million a year more than the Twins' offer. That was at a time when $1 million a year still meant something. Puckett took the Twins' offer.
        Ripken didn't even try free agency, Shapiro said. He stayed in Baltimore for $32 million.
        ''We conjectured that as a free agent his number might have gone to $40 million,'' Shapiro said.
        With Pettitte, Hendricks responded in an e-mail message Sunday, ''it is not family versus money, as your question suggests.
        ''Both are important variables. However, three years ago, the Yankees were relatively passive in their pursuit of Andy and the Astros were aggressive. Andy and Laura planned to have more children, and their oldest children were younger. So their family planning factored heavily, but was not totally dispositive.
        ''Today, the family is complete. Laura and the two oldest boys are very comfortable with Dad going back to N.Y.C. The commitment is only for six months plus the playoffs, once you factor in that Andy will be in Florida during spring training for either team. So the brevity of the commitment is a key factor.''
        Pettitte, Hendricks wrote, was torn between the Yankees and the Astros, adding, ''In the final analysis, I think Andy felt a lot more wanted by the Astros three years ago and a lot more wanted by the Yankees this year.''
        In addition, he wrote, when the Astros sought to acquire Jon Garland from the Chicago White Sox last week, in effect to replace Pettitte, ''that moved Andy from leaning towards Houston, despite their offer, to the Yankees.''
        In a subsequent e-mail message Sunday, Hendricks added that Pettitte would have his family live with him in New York during the season and would deal with the problem of having to take his children out of school in Texas.
        ''They seem to be at peace with their decision,'' Hendricks wrote, meaning the decision to sign with the Yankees.
        Furthermore, Hendricks said, Pettitte told him Saturday: ''I love Houston and a lot of my teammates, and I will always cheer for my friends here and the Astros. But it is time to go help the Yankees win another championship.''
        The day that Pettitte agreed to help the Yankees win another championship, his father said money did not spur his son's decision. But despite that statement, and despite Hendricks's explanation Sunday, one thought remains: If Hendricks was making proposals to the Astros to try to get them to raise their offer closer to the Yankees' offer, and since Pettitte said yes to the Yankees when the Astros would not go to $14 million from $12 million, how is it not about money?
        ON BASEBALL
      