
        THE grilled chicken breast bones didn't look much like food.
        But I was having dinner at Yakitori Torys, Midtown's newest yakitori spot, at the unholy hour of 6 p.m. for the express purpose of getting to the really weird stuff before it was gone. (Show up at 8 and you will be out of luck.) So we dug in.
        The grill had colored the edges of the bones, impaled on bamboo skewers, a faint brown, which had the effect of highlighting their almost spooky, nearly translucent whiteness. They crunched like tough cartilage -- as opposed to that soft cartilage crunch of jellyfish, for example -- and reminded me of the flavor chicken bones contribute to chicken broth: not the meaty middle notes from the flesh, not the golden yellow richness from rendered fat and skin, but a higher, thinner, fainter, harder-to-put-your-finger-on one.
        They left me thinking that the English language is short on words to describe the flavor of cooked bones. A friend, however, was sure of his words the next time we talked: ''Dude, I don't think those things were totally edible.''
        He didn't like them. You might not either. They are just one of the many avian oddities available at Torys, which is the mirror image of its sibling restaurant, Yakitori Totto on West 55th Street. The most unusual stuff on the menu is not for everybody. It's best for those whose appreciation for chicken isn't vanilla. For fowl fetishists.
        A dinner companion confided that at her home, her mother routinely absconded with the remains of roast chickens. When she was done, a pile of broken bones, stripped of every edible morsel and sucked clean of marrow, was all that was left. Torys is the restaurant for her.
        We moved on to skewers of inoffensive-if-not-compelling grilled necks, ''soft knee bones'' (''I guess these are softer than kneecaps would be,'' said He Who Didn't Like the Grilled Bones) and tails, which we unanimously adored for their perfect ratio of molten chicken fat to crispy chicken skin.
        On a couple of visits there were skewers of chicken oysters, those little nuggets of meat between the hip and the tail that all true chicken lovers covet. They are grilled medium-rare, with your choice of Okinawa sea salt or yakitori sauce, as are all the basic skewers (skewers run between $2 and $4).
        Though chicken sashimi has disappeared from the menu at Totto, Torys has brought it back. Yes, it's probably a bad idea, health wise, to chance it with raw chicken. But for those who consider food safety warnings to be signposts to deliciousness, its flesh is sweet and firm, like that of a medium-fatty white fish.
        Torys also has an expansive and adventurous menu loaded with non-chicken items, like a bowl of tuna liver paste and cream cheese ($8) that practically screamed to be served with bagels, or a creamy dessert custard flavored with apricot kernels ($5.50). The tempura may not be flawlessly executed, but the selection of things that you can have fried -- like a pile of baby octopuses ($7) or slices of arrestingly astringent bitter melon ($7) -- is anything but ordinary.
        The moist chicken ''meatball'' ($3.50) is a far safer play. It looks like the thickest part of a baseball bat rendered in ground chicken that has been lacquered with a sweetish soy-brown sauce.
        Torys does the basics better than anyone (save perhaps Totto), turning out subtly flavored, carefully grilled chicken skewers from parts of the bird you might actually recognize, and does a commendable job with shishito peppers and other grilled veggies.
        The young Japanese guys who work the grills sacrifice their lungs in billowing clouds of chicken smoke as they gingerly flip skewers, misting them or the fire below with a squirt bottle to moderate the heat. It's all in the name of getting your chicken to you a tender, moist medium-rare. If you want them to kill it on the grill, be sure to speak up.
        Yakitori Torys  248 East 52nd Street, Midtown; (212) 813-1800.
        BEST DISHES -- All grilled skewers, particularly the chicken meatball, chicken heart and Kobe beef tongue; and anything with shishito peppers.  PRICE RANGE -- Grilled skewers, $2 to $4 each; larger dishes, $4 to $12; desserts, $4 to $7.  CREDIT CARDS -- All major cards.  HOURS -- Monday through Saturday, 6 p.m. to 11:30 p.m.; Sundays until 11 p.m.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Narrow two-story flight of stairs to enter.
        $25 AND UNDER
      