
        If we were in an era when people wrote pop-psych books about women's ''complexes,'' surely some enterprising trend spotter would come up with a counterpart to the virulent ''Cinderella complex'' that Colette Dowling first diagnosed in 1981. It could be called the Wife of Bath complex, the Moll Flanders complex or the Tara Reid complex.
        At risk would be young women who feel a misguided political imperative to ''get in touch with their sexuality,'' whatever that might mean, by stripping, carousing, pole-dancing or just arbitrarily carrying on. The consequence of these actions, this best seller would warn, would be increasingly exhibitionistic behavior with little calculable reward. Not to mention whoredom.
        Just kidding. Or, anyhow, I'm not saying that ''Dirty Dancing,'' the reality series now under way on WE, could alone drive a vulnerable young woman to desperate measures. But, under a banner of empowerment feminism, this new series partakes so thoroughly of what the author Ariel Levy has identified in her book ''Female Chauvinist Pigs'' as ''raunch culture'' that it's got to be an object lesson in something.
        The semi-enjoyable show tries to resurrect the camp-favorite parable of ''Dirty Dancing,'' the movie, in sync with the effort to extend the ''Dirty Dancing'' franchise with the musical now playing in London. WE's series recruits a bunch of reality-ready babes, many with extensive training in dance, and pairs them with swashbuckling dance instructors in a bid to conjure the old Patrick Swayze-Jennifer Grey magic.
        Absent of course from this ''Dirty Dancing'' is the mildly interesting cultural specificity of the 1987 film. (Set in 1963, in the Catskills, the movie told the story of a girl from a wealthy Jewish family who was drawn to a non-Jewish, working-class dancer.) In its place is vague language of can-doism and self-discovery. The women who arrive at the stage-set camp come to compete in a dance contest, but they really come (we're told) to become real women, never mind that many of them appear to be nearly 30, and plenty real already. And never mind that the real women, here at least, are above all those who can convince men -- weird men, with dance-instructor clothes and pose -- that they want to have sex with them.
        That's right: as Ryan, one of the instructors, put it, ''I want you guys to want to jump my bones.''
        It becomes a sport, while watching ''Dirty Dancing,'' to compare the ways the various players summarize the erotics of dance. The choreographer, Eddie, calls it the ''What? Uh-huh. What? Uh huh.'' In context these phrases make sense.
        But the problem with all this attention to the extra-dance content of the dance -- the attitudes, the connections, the sexuality -- is that the dancing suffers. While they do seem to practice often, the contestants also have time to have elaborate hair and makeup procedures done (all part of self-esteem-boosting). And they also worry overmuch about their relationship with their dance teachers.
        Artem, a handsome dancer from Fox's ''So You Think You Can Dance,'' has a big role on tonight's show. His interaction with the contestants is interesting. His laconic Russian style affords very little opportunity for psych-up talks about ''chemistry'' and everyone's future in show business. And he seems to have nothing else to say. He just wants to dance.
        Dirty Dancing  WE, tonight at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.
        Gena McCarthy and Kathie Farrell, executive producers for WE; Danielle Ostroske, producer; Don Weiner, Kevin Beggs and Alan Winters, executive producers for Lions Gate and Don Weiner Productions; Jeff Kopp, co-executive producer; Cris Judd, host.
        TELEVISION REVIEW
      