
        The Ford Motor Company expects Toyota of Japan to unseat it for good next year as the No. 2 company, behind General Motors, in the American car market, a position Ford has held since the 1920s, according to internal Ford projections.
        Those projections show that company officers believe that Ford will permanently fall to third place as soon as January. The shift appears to be happening much faster than Ford had previously signaled.
        Ford, which is struggling to restructure itself under a plan called the Way Forward, predicted in September that its market share within two years would bottom out at 14 to 15 percent of the market, making it smaller than Toyota is now. It had not specifically predicted that it would end up behind Toyota, but the implication was clear.
        That projection came only weeks after Ford hired a new chief executive, Alan R. Mulally, who formerly ran Boeing's commercial airplane business.
        Mr. Mulally has said Ford needs to pay more attention to cutting costs and transforming the way it does business than to traditional measurements like market share.
        Only six years ago, Ford had a firm grip on 25 percent of the American market, because of its popular F-series pickup and Explorer S.U.V., as well as the Taurus, which ranked during the mid-1990s as the nation's best-selling car.
        But high gasoline prices, quality issues and a lack of fuel-efficient small cars have caused Ford's sales and market share to tumble.
        Through November, the Ford and Lincoln-Mercury divisions held 16.2 percent of the American market, versus a combined 14.9 percent for Toyota and its other two divisions, Scion and Lexus.
        The Ford projections estimate that Ford could lose at least 1.1 percentage points of market share over the coming year, a result of Ford's decision this fall to discontinue the Taurus, which it had sold in large volumes to rental-car companies. It also expects sales of its F-series pickup and Explorer to continue dropping, costing it more share.
        The internal projections show that, in the meantime, Ford officials expect Toyota to gain more market share when it introduces a new version of the Tundra, its full-size pickup truck, in February. The gain, combined with Ford's loss, would put Toyota ahead.
        Toyota's eventual rise to second place in the American market was expected, even if the timing was unknown.
        Toyota beat Ford twice in monthly sales this year, first in July, and most recently in November, when Ford ranked fourth behind G.M., Toyota and Chrysler.
        Edmunds.com, a Web site offering car-buying advice, plans to issue its own forecast Thursday that will echo the internal Ford projections, predicting second place for Toyota by mid-2007.
        Ford's chief sales statistician, George Pipas, declined to comment Wednesday night on the internal projections. Of the Edmunds forecast, Mr. Pipas said only: ''Unless you think Toyota is going to go backwards, it's a good possibility that they will gain market share.''
        A Toyota spokesman, Joseph Tetherow, said the company's goal was not to beat Ford, but to satisfy its owners. ''I don't think we celebrate who we pass or what our standing in the market is,'' Mr. Tetherow said. ''It's focused on providing the right product to the customer.''
        ''If we're going to pass them,'' he said, ''it's their responsibility.''
        Mr. Tetherow said Toyota had benefited from the introduction this year of a new version of the Camry sedan, the nation's best-selling car, as well as the new Yaris subcompact, and the continued popularity of the Prius hybrid gas-electric vehicle.
        Toyota's growth is expected to continue, not just in the United States, but worldwide. On Friday, Toyota is expected to release its 2007 global production forecast, which, Japanese news reports have said, will mean it will pass General Motors next year to become the world's biggest auto company. It passed Ford globally in 2003.
        Toyota, which opened its seventh American factory in San Antonio last month, is deciding whether to build another North American assembly plant as well as an engine plant. By contrast, the Ford restructuring plan calls for it to shut 16 factories and eliminate 44,000 blue- and white-collar jobs by 2008.
        Ford officials are also looking over their shoulders at the Chrysler Group, which has embarked on its latest restructuring plan after seeing its inventories of unsold cars and trucks swell this year. In recent weeks, Chrysler has stepped up rebates and other deals, especially on leftover 2006 models.
        If the heavy incentives continue into 2007, and Chrysler picks up the rental-car sales lost when Ford discontinued the Taurus, Ford's projections show it could wind up fourth, behind G.M., Toyota and Chrysler.
        A Toyota move into second place next year would occur on the 50th anniversary of its entering the American market.
        It was not an easy entry, however; consumers rejected the first offering, the tiny Toypet, prompting Toyota to withdraw from the American market for a year. For 2006, its sales in this country are expected to approach 2.5 million.
      