
        The federal grand jury investigating steroid use in sports yesterday indicted a former cyclist, Tammy Thomas, for perjury and obstruction of justice, charging that she lied to another grand jury looking into the Bay Area Laboratory Co-Operative steroids case.
        Thomas received a lifetime competition ban in 2002 from the United States Anti-Doping Agency after she tested positive for the previously undetectable steroid norbolethone.
        Kevin V. Ryan, the United States attorney for the Northern District of California, said in a written statement that the charges were part of a new stage of the case targeting people who federal investigators believe lied to them or to the grand jury during the three-year investigation into Balco.
        That category includes Barry Bonds, who is under investigation for suspicion of perjury during his grand jury testimony, Trevor Graham, the track coach who was indicted last month for allegedly making false statements to investigators, and others.
        Graham, who had sparked the Balco investigation by sending a syringe to investigators, has pleaded not guilty and is free on bond. The syringe contained a previously undetectable steroid known as THG, or the clear.
        Michael L. Rains, Bonds's criminal defense lawyer, said yesterday that he did not know what the indictment of Thomas might mean for Bonds. ''I don't think it's bad news for Barry at all,'' Rains said, ''but keep in mind Greg Anderson continues to reside over in federal prison in Dublin, and they may be waiting to see if he has a nervous breakdown or something and talks.''
        Anderson, Bonds's childhood friend and former trainer, has defied court orders to testify to the Balco grand jury about Bonds. Anderson was sent to jail for contempt of court, and will be asked again to testify.
        Thomas, a world champion cyclist, testified to a grand jury in 2003 that she had never taken performance-enhancing drugs or received them from Patrick Arnold, the chemist who worked with Balco in Burlingame, Calif.
        Thomas's failed drug test that led to her lifetime suspension was her second doping offense.
        She did not return a telephone call seeking comment.
        Ryan said in his statement that the federal investigation had ''generally unfolded in three distinct stages.''
        ''In the early stages of the investigation, the individuals who distributed steroids to some of the nation's top-flight athletes were indicted and convicted,'' he said. ''In the second stage, we developed the evidence to indict and convict the creator of the undetectable steroid THG distributed through Balco.
        ''A third stage has begun as we bring charges against individuals who lied to investigators or committed perjury while testifying under oath to a federal grand jury. Our investigation into each of these stages will continue as the evidence develops.''
        DRUG TESTING
      