
        The last several winters have been mean seasons for the music business, filled with talk of declining CD sales, rumors of layoffs and uncertainty about the digital future. During each of these winters, however, there has been one industry success that might qualify as a Christmas miracle.
        A band called Trans-Siberian Orchestra has sold more than five million Christmas albums over the last decade and packed arenas across America with elaborate, effects-filled concerts. Its 1996 debut album, ''Christmas Eve and Other Stories,'' is on track to sell about a quarter of a million copies in the last two months of this year. And it will be the thirteenth highest-grossing concert act in the last three months, according to Pollstar, the concert industry trade magazine. Demand is so high that two troupes perform under the Trans-Siberian name, each playing a matinee as well as an evening show in some cities.
        The bigger surprise is that the Trans-Siberian Orchestra (well, orchestras) plays symphonic rock -- a genre that has not been popular since the 1970s -- under the direction of some former members of a heavy-metal band with more than a touch of Spinal Tap. ''It definitely took the industry by surprise,'' said Craig Kallman, chairman and chief executive of Atlantic Records, the group's label. ''It's unique, and that's part of why it's a phenomenon.'' With concept albums that recall progressive rock groups like Yes and performances in sports arenas that incorporate pyrotechnics and lasers, Trans-Siberian Orchestra certainly stands out among traditional Christmas acts such as Mannheim Steamroller. But the group's over-the-top approach to holiday music is less surprising if one considers its origins. Several core members, including singer Jon Oliva, keyboardist Robert Kinkel, and composer-producer Paul O'Neill are musicians associated with Savatage, the heavy-metal group best-known for dark rock operas like ''Hall of the Mountain King.''
        ''The best summary of Trans-Siberian Orchestra is 'Phantom of the Opera' meets the Who with Pink Floyd's light show,'' said Paul O'Neill, who is the creative force behind the band. Although he was never a full member of Savatage, he wrote and produced much of its music.
        The band's story is as unusual as its combination of influences.
        Savatage had a minor hit in 1985 with its first album for Atlantic Records, but the band never fully capitalized on the hard-rock boom in the 1980s, and by the mid-1990s it had lost many of its original members as well as much of its following. In 1995, the band gave Atlantic an album, ''Dead Winter Dead,'' for nothing, so it could use Atlantic's name to score better bookings overseas, according to Jason Flom, an Atlantic executive at the time. (Mr. Flom, who worked closely with the Trans-Siberian Orchestra until he left Atlantic last year, is now chairman and chief executive of Virgin Records.)
        The album, a rock opera about the war in the Balkans, did not garner much interest among metal fans.
        ''I don't see any way we would have made another record,'' Mr. Flom said. ''It was pretty bleak.''
        In early December, however, Mr. Flom received a call from the band's lawyer saying that a track called ''Christmas Eve (Sarajevo 12/24),'' an instrumental, would be played on WPLJ radio in New York, then one of the most influential pop music stations in the country. At first he thought the lawyer was joking. ''The album had gargoyles on the cover,'' Mr. Flom said.
        But WPLJ played the song, and the station's programming director, Scott Shannon, read part of the album's liner notes about a Christmastime hope for peace during a time of war on the air. Soon other stations, pop and rock alike, were calling Atlantic to get copies of the song. The label, which had not made many promotional discs, scrambled to find some.
        Mr. Flom believed that this kind of music could find an audience. So after Christmas, he called Mr. O'Neill and told him that, ''Everyone likes this song but no one likes Savatage.'' He suggested that Mr. O'Neill take the song and put it on a Christmas album.
        True to his aesthetic, Mr. O'Neill wrote a rock opera, ''Christmas Eve and Other Stories,'' that called for a more ambitious band, so he hired two drummers, several guitarists, and 16 singers. The first album they made, ''Christmas Eve and Other Stories,'' has sold more than two million copies, according to Nielsen SoundScan, which tracks music sales. Full of orchestral sweep and art-rock bombast, ''Christmas Eve and Other Stories'' as well as the group's three subsequent albums present Christmas music like the old British art-rock trio, Emerson, Lake and Palmer might have made it.
        In person, Mr. O'Neill still looks every bit the rocker after a decade playing mostly Christmas music. He arrives for an early dinner at Shun Lee Palace in midtown Manhattan in black jeans, a white shirt, a black leather jacket and sunglasses -- his usual uniform, say those who know him.
        The key to the band's success, say some, is just how little Mr. O'Neill has changed his approach to music. Trans-Siberian Orchestra's elaborately designed albums include stories he writes himself, and the group's performances are staged as grand spectacles. T-shirts given to the crew read, ''Fog it, light it, blow it up,'' a motto they apparently take to heart. ''We spend over $2 million in seven and a half weeks on just the pyro,'' Mr. O'Neill said with pride.
        Mr. O'Neill grew up in Flushing, Queens, one of 10 siblings in an Irish-Catholic family. His parents did not allow him to watch much television, but his father, a history professor, had a gift for making up fairy tales that Mr. O'Neill seems to have inherited. In the 1970s, Mr. O'Neill worked for David Krebbs, an influential manager who steered the careers of Aerosmith and the Scorpions, among other bands. (Mr. Krebbs also managed the Trans-Siberian Orchestra until a few years ago.) Trans-Siberian Orchestra has released one nonholiday album, called ''Beethoven's Last Night.'' But Mr. O'Neill said he had always been fascinated with Christmas, which he presents as an annual opportunity for redemption in his stories. He likes to tell a story about seeing two New York City cabs collide on Christmas Eve, and how the drivers decided to let the incident go rather than fight about it.
        Musically, Mr. O'Neill presents the holiday in a way that appeals to a wide variety of concert-goers. ''As you watch it and understand it you realize he took a lot of different elements of culture -- it's the Christmas mashup,'' said Marc Geiger, the group's agent at the William Morris Agency. This, along with low ticket prices -- the average this year is about $40 -- helps make the Trans-Siberian show a family attraction.
        Generally, critics have not reacted favorably. ''There was enough Christmas ham for everyone,'' Jon Pareles, a critic for The New York Times, wrote in a review of one of the group's concerts in 2004.
        Nevertheless, many fans return year after year, which is one reason the group's touring business has grown dramatically in the last few years.
        ''Every show they ask the people who's been here before and easily 50 to 60 percent have come previously,'' said Michael Belkin, president for the Midwest region of Live Nation, the concert promotion company. ''When does it tire I don't know, but the end is not in sight.''
        As Mr. O'Neill sees it, Trans-Siberian Orchestra is hardly limited to Christmas music -- that just happened to be a good place to start. ''Because it's a full rock band with a full symphony, you need to take on a subject that's larger than life,'' he said. He has other projects in the works, including an opera about the Russian revolution and is negotiating to create two shows for Broadway.
        Mr. O'Neill even hints that, sometime soon, he may put Christmas behind him. But that does not mean he will not continue to take it seriously.
        ''Dickens wrote five books about Christmas and when someone asked him why, he said it's too large a subject to take on in one book,'' he said. ''So I figured that if Christmas was too large a subject to take on in one book, it was too large a subject to take on in one rock opera.''
      