
        The Knicks' already struggling season reached a new low last night when a brawl erupted in the closing minutes of their game against the Denver Nuggets. All 10 players on court at the time were ejected as the fight spilled into the front row at Madison Square Garden.
        Carmelo Anthony, the N.B.A.'s leading scorer, was one of those ejected. The fighting was the ugliest in the league in two years, since a memorable and frightening brawl when players for the Indiana Pacers went into the stands to fight Detroit Pistons fans.
        ''Clearly, this isn't how we or the N.B.A. or anybody wants to be perceived,'' said Isiah Thomas, the Knicks' coach and president.
        Last night's melee occurred with 1 minute 15 seconds left in the fourth quarter and the Nuggets leading by 19 points on their way to a 123-100 victory.
        Things erupted when the rookie Mardy Collins committed a flagrant foul on the Nuggets' J. R. Smith, who was going for a layup. In seconds, Nate Robinson and Smith appeared to tackle each other, and a scrum formed behind the baseline.
        Anthony then punched Collins in the face, sending Collins to the floor and escalating the fight.
        Several other players also threw punches, and Anthony is almost certain to draw a suspension from the league.
        The Knicks' Jared Jeffries had to be restrained as he chased Anthony. Several players, coaches and security guards ran onto the court trying to end the fight.
        With all 10 players who were playing at the time of the fight ejected, the game was delayed for several minutes as the three referees tried to sort out what had happened.
        ''After we gave a hard foul, they pushed it to the next level,'' Jeffries said. ''Mardy got sucker-punched, and it escalated from there.''
        The fight came at a time of increasing pressure on the Knicks. James L. Dolan, the chairman of Madison Square Garden, felt compelled last week to publicly support Thomas, who is under an improve-or-else edict this season imposed by the team's ownership. Earlier in the game, Dolan was sitting in his front-row seat, just a few feet from where the fight began.
        Last night's events seemed to further undermine Thomas's efforts to turn the Knicks around. He is the architect of the team, and its record is 9-17.
        ''He should have shot two free throws and that should have been the end of it,'' Thomas said of Smith. ''I don't know particularly how it escalated from there to what it turned out to be because it was a game that they had won quite convincingly. That should have been the end of it.''
        The Knicks who were ejected were Robinson, Jeffries, Collins, Channing Frye and David Lee. The ejected Nuggets were Anthony, Smith, Eduardo Najera, Marcus Camby and Andre Miller.
        Jeffries and Frye were the only starters on the court for the Knicks at the time of the fight, while the Nuggets were still using four of their five starters. Several Knicks said they believed the Nuggets were trying to run up the score, and they seemed to regard that as a provocation.
        ''From what they did as in keeping guys in, I knew a foul was going to come, a hard one,'' Robinson said. ''Because we're not going to just let guys keep dunking and keep dunking when they're up 20 and they got their starters in. You know, it was a good clean foul. After that, it just went downhill from there.''
        Stephon Marbury also said he was surprised the Nuggets left so many starters in the game with such a large lead.
        The teams only play each other twice a year, and they do not have a history of bad blood.
        ''This isn't even a rivalry,'' Thomas said.
        The Knicks won the first meeting between the teams this season, in Denver, by 109-107.
        But there was friction between Nuggets Coach George Karl and Thomas last summer. Thomas reportedly was upset with Karl for talking about the state of the Knicks. After last season, the Knicks fired their coach, Larry Brown, who is close to Karl.
        The Knicks seem to reach new lows each week. The have been battling injuries to key players, including Quentin Richardson, Frye and Steve Francis.
        Jeffries saw an upside to the fight, saying that when teammates defended each other, it was a sign of affection.
        ''It's his rookie year,'' Jefferies said of Collins. ''I'm going to stick up for him.''
        Collins was not available for comment after the game.
        The brawl was a setback for the league's efforts to improve its image although, in perhaps the only piece of good news to emerge from the fracas, no fans were believed to be involved in last night's fight.
        ''I feel bad for the league,'' Karl said. ''I feel bad for the Denver Nuggets and the New York Knicks. Very poor display of respecting basketball, of respecting the game in the best place in the world to play basketball.''
        The league has taken several steps to improve its image over the past few years, including implementing a dress code and calling technical fouls on players who argue excessively with the referees.
        When asked if he thought the fight had bruised the league's image, Marbury said, ''I'm sure the N.B.A. will find a way to clean it up.''
        The fight also overshadowed a fine performance by Anthony, who scored a game-high 34 points. Marbury led the Knicks with a season-high 31 points.
        The Knicks trailed by 26 points midway through the third quarter as Anthony at one point outscored them by 13-0. The Knicks then scored 28 points in about six minutes to cut the Nuggets lead to 94-84 after three quarters.
        Richardson, who is battling back pain, was not active for the game. Frye, who returned to the rotation after missing the previous 10 games with a sprained left ankle, started and scored 10 points.
        But with players now facing suspensions, Frye may spend a little more time on the bench.
        PRO BASKETBALL
      