
        Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York, yesterday set up a Web site and held his first fund-raiser for the presidential exploratory committee he created last month.
        The Web site, joinrudy2008.com, emphasizes three themes -- fighting crime, cutting taxes and taking fiscal responsibility -- that would presumably form the core of a campaign platform should Mr. Giuliani decide to run for the Republican Party's nomination. The fund-raiser, a two-hour, $2,100-a-person cocktail reception at the Marriott Marquis Hotel in Times Square, was Mr. Giuliani's first attempt to directly test his ability to persuade donors to contribute to an effort that could cost hundreds of millions of dollars.
        Speaking to reporters after the fund-raiser, Mr. Giuliani said he was still assessing his prospects and added, ''This is a good start.'' Asked about Senator John McCain, an Arizona Republican who is considering a presidential run, Mr. Giuliani called him ''a fine man'' and ''a good friend.''
        ''We'll have a large number of people who support us, and then we'll figure out who has a better chance,'' Mr. Giuliani said.
        He also praised Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts, another possible Republican contender. ''We're going to have to figure out which one of us can make the best contribution, who has the talent, experience and background to guide this country two years from now,'' Mr. Giuliani said.
        Those attending the fund-raiser included Anthony H. Gioia, a former United States ambassador to Malta; Mel M. Immergut, chairman of the law firm Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy; Marvin R. Shanken, publisher of Cigar Aficionado; Paul E. Singer, a hedge fund manager; and James S. Turley, chairman of the accounting firm Ernst & Young.
        Another attendee, Guy P. Wyser-Pratte, who was a prominent takeover investor in the 1980s, said in a telephone interview on Monday: ''I supported Rudy when he first ran for mayor in 1989 and I got a lot of scorn for it. And I will always support Rudy. I think he protected New York from floating into the East River and he will certainly give Madame Queen for a Day a run for her money.''
        (Mr. Wyser-Pratte said he was referring to Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York, a Democrat who is weighing a White House run.)
        Several of those at the fund-raiser have worked for Mr. Giuliani.
        William J. Diamond, a former commissioner of citywide administrative services, said, ''Once you've been exposed to Rudy's leadership, you can never forget the talent he has in inspiring people.''
        Andrew S. Eristoff, a former city finance commissioner, said: ''He could seize the fundamentals of any situation and then ask the most insightful and challenging questions possible. I've never worked for a smarter man.''
        Two former deputy mayors, Peter J. Powers and Randy M. Mastro, and a former police commissioner, Howard Safir, also attended.
        The fund-raiser's invitation listed Kenneth G. Langone as the chief host. Mr. Langone, a founder of Home Depot who runs a small investment bank called Invemed Associates, has given money to past Giuliani campaigns and his political action committee, Solutions America. Mr. Langone was also a director at the New York Stock Exchange and was chairman of its compensation committee when the pay of Richard A. Grasso, then the chairman and chief executive, soared.
        Mr. Langone and Mr. Grasso, who gave Mr. Giuliani's political action committee $5,000 in June, are the subjects of a civil suit filed by Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general and governor-elect, who argued that Mr. Grasso's $139.5 million compensation package was too high. A state judge ruled on Oct. 19 that Mr. Grasso must return as much as $100 million; Mr. Grasso is appealing.
        A number of participants last night gushed about Mr. Giuliani's leadership. ''We haven't had a real hero since Eisenhower,'' said Stewart F. Lane, a Broadway producer. ''Rudy's the man for the job.''
        Jennifer A. Honen, a homemaker from Slingerlands, N.Y., said that she appreciated Mr. Giuliani's support for abortion rights -- a position that could be a liability among socially conservative voters. ''I grew up with that right,'' Ms. Honen said.
        Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, Mr. Giuliani's successor and a fellow Republican, has said that he will not take sides in the 2008 race.
        Asked yesterday if he would attend the fund-raiser, Mr. Bloomberg said he had other plans: ''taking my daughter to a Rangers game.''
      