
        GENERAL ELECTRIC'S shares are being brought to life.
        After years of being stuck in the low to mid-30s, they have climbed 7.5 percent in the last week, to close at $38.15 yesterday. And few predict they will fall back anytime soon.
        G.E. thinks it is about time.
        ''We believe the market is seeing what we see -- a company built for the future that is investing and delivering for its shareowners with double-digit earnings growth, expanding margins, strong cash flow and increasing returns,'' said Russell Wilkerson, a G.E. spokesman.
        Maybe so -- but G.E. has been saying that for several years. And analysts have long been part of the chorus. According to Thomson Financial, analysts have had a buy rating on G.E. shares for more than a year. Still, G.E. shares have been mired in the low to mid-30s for nearly two years.
        But now, investors are bidding them up again. Analysts say G.E.'s newfound attractiveness is as much a function of the global economy as of anything new in company strategy. ''G.E.'s emphasis on services makes it easy to count on predictable, consistent earnings growth, so a portfolio manager who thinks the economy is slowing down is going to want to overweight G.E.,'' said Daniel J. Rosenblatt, an analyst for Marble Harbor Investment Counsel, an investment firm that owns G.E. shares.
        Deane M. Dray, an analyst with Goldman Sachs, put it more succinctly, saying, ''G.E.'s portfolio was built for this stage of the cycle.''
        It is as plausible an explanation as any. After all, it is not as though G.E. has set new strategy or broken news. When Jeffrey R. Immelt, the chief executive, played host to analysts in New York on Dec. 12, he pretty much reaffirmed what he had said all year.
        Yes, G.E. will show 2006 earnings of $1.97 to $1.99 a share. Yes, revenue will continue to grow at two to three times the growth rate for the gross domestic product. Yes, it will improve margins and return on invested capital, and increase earnings 10 to 13 percent. Yes, it will finally turn its ailing NBC Universal unit around -- and yes, Vivendi will hold onto its 20 percent stake. And yes, G.E. will continue to concentrate on increasing sales in Europe and developing countries.
        What little news there was would have been more notable in its absence. For example, G.E. said it would raise its quarterly dividend 12 percent, to 28 cents a share. But G.E. has paid a dividend every year since 1899, and this was the 31st consecutive year in which it raised the amount. ''It would have been a shock if they had not increased the dividend,'' Mr. Dray said.
        According to Thomson Financial, the consensus among analysts was that G.E. was a good buy before the meeting, and it remained so afterward. ''The fundamental outlook in the portfolio is quite strong,'' Jeffrey Sprague, an analyst at Citigroup who expects G.E. shares to hit $45, wrote to investors.
        A few rumors may have bumped up the stock. Last week, Mr. Sprague suggested in a research report that G.E. was poised to sell its plastics business, which has been unable to pass along spiking raw material costs with price increases.
        That rumor has surfaced before, and Mr. Immelt, as is his wont, has never confirmed nor denied it. But where in the past investors have drawn a blank on a possible buyer, this time many are saying that private equity may step up to the plate.
        ''There's a lot of private equity money around, and if they finally do sell plastics, that could really drive the stock,'' said Timothy M. Ghriskey, chief investment officer at Solaris Asset Management. Solaris does not own G.E. shares now, but Mr. Ghriskey said, ''We are continuing to evaluate it as we explore the rumor about a plastics sale.''
        But even if that rumor turns out to be false, G.E. shares are likely to keep moving up. Mr. Dray of Goldman Sachs now rates G.E. a ''conviction buy'' -- the industrial company in which he has the most confidence for near-term stock appreciation. To him and many other analysts, what has really changed, it seems, is not so much G.E. as the economy in which it functions.
        Investors tend to frown on conglomerates, and G.E.'s longstanding refusal to pare itself back to a few businesses has often steered investors away from the stock. In each of the past three years, returns to G.E. shareholders have been 9 percent, lagging the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index, which rose nearly 11 percent each year. In contrast, shares of other industrial companies -- Mr. Dray mentions Emerson, United Technologies, Danaher and Illinois Tool Works -- have soared.
        But in this type of economy, analysts say, G.E.'s conglomerate status serves as a welcome hedge.
        Most economists say the American economy is moving into the last gasps of this growth cycle. G.E.'s power generators and aircraft engines, all so-called late-cycle businesses that do well after an extended period of economic growth has forced companies to expand capacity, are still doing robust business.
        Few analysts expect that to continue much longer. But G.E. has steadily increased the percentage of revenue from services, and even when new-equipment sales slow, analysts expect contracts to maintain existing equipment will start swinging up.
        Moreover, European economies are strengthening, and countries like China are still in full growth mode. G.E. recently announced a $1 billion deal to sell gas turbines to Saudi Arabia. G.E. is already close to deriving half of its revenue from outside the United States.
        ''Jeff Immelt has aligned G.E.'s portfolio to perform well in an international economy,'' Mr. Rosenblatt of Marble Harbor said.
        Now, Mr. Immelt can only hope investors will continue to realign their portfolios to include more G.E. stock.
        MARKET PLACE
      