
        Sweet Gums, Spiky and Not
        Q. I would like to plant the tree that has leaves like maples and little brown spiky balls for seedpods. I have seen several at Yale. Do you know what it is?
        A. It is the beautiful native sweet gum, Liquidambar styraciflua, which is notorious for those seedpod ''gum balls.'' Thorny as cactuses, hard as wood, they are the bane of lawn mowers, barefoot walkers and gutter cleaners across the southern two-thirds of the country.
        New Haven is near the northern edge of sweet gum's hardiness range, but Eric Larson, manager of the Marsh Botanical Garden at Yale there, said the campus does have some good-size specimens. He said they were probably planted sometime between 1920 and 1942, at the direction of the landscape architect Beatrix Ferrand.
        Sweet gums are majestic trees, notable for great fall colors, Mr. Larson said. ''They turn yellow in the center, then layer outward through orange to red,'' he said. ''And they're almost disease- and pest-free. The only drawback is those 'Battlestar Galactica' seed capsules.''
        But he added that sweet gums need a lot of room. Mature trees can be over 70 feet tall. And although the trees are pyramidal when young, the crowns widen as they age until they are as broad as oaks.
        Fortunately, not all sweet gums are hazard-bearing behemoths. The variety Rotundiloba (a k a Rotundifolia) is narrower, slightly shorter and seedless. And the dwarf, shrubby Gumball tops out at about 15 feet.
        Rotundiloba, Gumball and several others are sold by Forestfarm, (541) 846-7269 or forestfarm.com. Gumball is among the choices at RareFind Nursery, (732) 833-0613 or rarefindnursery.com.
        Rosemary on Ice
        Q. My rosemary plants are in a window box in Newport, R.I. Even though it is mid-December, they are blooming and happy. How do I help them winter outdoors?
        A. Newport may be getting warmer, but it is not yet warm enough for rosemary, which usually dies when temperatures fall below 20 degrees.
        If the window box has deep well-drained soil (to insulate the roots without rotting them), and if you mulch thickly with straw, and if there is protection from wind and harsh winter sun, and if the house bleeds heat, the plants have an outside chance. But it would be safer to pot them up and winter them indoors.
        Address questions by e-mail to gardening@nytimes.com. Unpublished questions cannot be answered individually.
        Garden Q.&A.
      