
        Misled by Latin
        Q.  On a garden tour last year we saw a beautiful vine with bright red flowers and very delicate, feathery leaves. The owner told us it was cypress vine, and that the Latin name was Ipomoea quamoclit. We ordered seeds for I. quamoclit from a catalog that called it cardinal climber, figuring that if the Latin was the same, the plant would be, too. It isn't. The leaves of our vine are much larger, and they are saw-toothed, not feathery. What is the Latin for cypress vine, and where can we find it?
        A.  The Latin name of your feathery friend is Ipomoea quamoclit. The vine you got is a hybrid of I. quamoclit and I. hederifolia, called I. x multifida by botanists and quamoclit by just about everybody else. It is a more robust plant, with thicker stems, longer growth (to 20 feet) and slightly larger, bright red flowers, like those of the cypress vine.
        The confusion comes because botanists are not of one mind about whether these vines, members of a group of about 20, are morning glories (Ipomoea) or a separate genus, Quamoclit. If the latter, cypress vine would be Quamoclit pennata, your vine, Q. multifida, and so on.
        Dr. Daniel Austin, a botany professor at Florida Atlantic University in Boca Raton and a morning glory specialist, said that the separate-genus theory got its big boost in 1830 and ruled for a long time, but that ''they're not really that different -- the tubular flower shape is just an adaptation to the pollinators, hummingbirds and butterflies.'' And differences in the number of seed capsules don't matter either. ''Molecular genetics support reuniting the quamoclits with the rest of the Ipomoeas,'' he said.
        This merger appears to be almost complete, but if there is any doubt, it's best to ask, because the common-name situation is a mess. Your I. x multifida is sometimes called cypress vine; I. quamoclit is occasionally known as crimson glory; and both are sold as cardinal climber.
        True red-flowered, feathery-leafed I. quamoclit is sold by J. L. Hudson, Seedsman, Box 337, Star Route 2, La Honda, Calif. 94020 (catalog $1), and by Park Seed (which also offers a mix of red and white), 1 Parkton Avenue, Greenwood, S.C. 29647, (800) 845-3369 (catalog free).
        An Embattled Lilac
        Q.  The lilac by my cedar fence is being overgrown by a 12-foot hemlock next to it. I pruned back the hemlock in March, trying to give the lilac more room, but it still looks crowded and is growing up and out in a narrow treelike fashion, rather than a rounded shape. Should I try to move it to a better location? When is the best time?
        A.  Between the fence and the hemlock, the lilac should get a lot of credit for being any shape at all. It will never thrive unless it has more breathing room. But before you get out the shovel there are a few things to consider.
        To start with, this divorce involves two trees. If digging up the lilac will damage lots of the hemlock roots, it might be better to just chop it down and start fresh. It's not hard to find eight-foot common lilacs at well-stocked garden centers, and as a bonus you'll have one hole to dig instead of two.
        If the lilac is rare or otherwise special, you should move it (or cut down the hemlock). The best time is early spring, before it leafs out. You can prepare this year by cutting down with a sharp spade where you will be digging next year, a process called root pruning.
        Cut only a third of the way around. Don't make any prying motions or remove any soil. You're just forcing the lilac to make some new roots closer to the plant, roots that will come in handy when close to the plant is all they have.
        Address questions to Garden Q.& A., The New York Times, 229 West 43rd Street, New York 10036, or by e-mail to gardening@nytimes .com. Those of general interest will be published. Unpublished questions cannot be answered individually.
      