
        John Bowe's article (Nov. 19) increases awareness about the reality of the diversity of family life in America. Ozzie and Harriet are, and always have been, a myth.
        While Bowe explores the families of gay fathers and gay donors as somehow ''redefining'' family, the simple truth is that extended and complex family structures are the norm and are hardly unique to gay- and lesbian-headed families.
        As lesbian mothers of twin 4-year-old boys, my partner and I raise our children with the help of a network of loving friends, neighbors, aunts, uncles, grandparents and other family members. We know firsthand how important all of these relationships are to the well-being of our sons. Gay fathers and gay donors could say the same thing about their families.
        Jennifer Chrisler
        Washington
        What I consider a significant cause of stress on lesbian and gay parents did not come up in your article. A high percentage of young gay parents may find themselves left to raise their children while alienated from their families and the communities in which they live. Rejected by their own families, they are often without the reassuring benefit of unconditional parental love, and the relief of practical support.
        Claudia Glassman
        Brimfield, Mass.
        It amazed me that John Bowe managed to write an article about gay fathers and co-parenting that depicted such a skewed collection of seemingly self-indulgent gay men and controlling lesbians. Now maybe you can do an article on full-time gay fathers, those of us who stay up all night with a sick infant, soothe tears from a child's face, host a gaggle of toddlers at a birthday party and communicate openly with the people with whom they have chosen to parent. My husband and I, along with our co-parent and our 1-year-old daughter, have created a nurturing three-parent, two-household family. As she grows up, our daughter will know the love of a committed full-time father -- she's got two of them!
        David Shneer
        Denver
      