
        There are two possible conclusions in the analysis of the 7-7 Giants, and neither of them is a comfortable one for a team expecting more than this.
        Either they are an underachieving lot, not playing up to their own expectations, or they simply represent an apt definition of N.F.L. mediocrity, a team that will not get better without changes, whether in the roster or the coaching staff.
        On Monday, a day after the Giants lost for the fifth time in six games, Coach Tom Coughlin was asked if the Giants had room to improve or if they had reached their ''ceiling.''
        Coughlin disputed the ceiling theory. He described several plays during Sunday's 36-22 loss to the Philadelphia Eagles that cost the Giants the game, and suggested that improving in a broad range of areas would create victories, and not a moment too soon.
        ''Can we play better?'' Coughlin said. ''No doubt about it.''
        Improvement, he said, ''is the message that I'm selling.''
        But emphasizing a gap between how the Giants have played and how good they can be represents a precarious balance.
        At worst, it directs blame back at Coughlin and the coaching staff, because the Giants admittedly are not playing up to their abilities. At best, suggesting that there is room for improvement could be viewed as nothing but predictable positive spin, but still a euphemism for underachieving.
        Coughlin blanched.
        ''That word -- I've heard that thrown around,'' he said.
        After explaining that the Giants knew what was at stake against the Eagles, he added: ''The ball bounces in funny ways, as we well know. The underachieving part is the 36-22, but not because people didn't care enough or try as hard as they could or whatever.''
        There are no signs that the Giants have stopped playing hard, which only adds to the mystery of their fall. The Giants were 6-2 in early November, playing a home game against the Chicago Bears that could have lifted them to the top seeding in the conference.
        Now the Giants sit in the sixth spot, and they awoke Monday to learn that they had miscalculated the control they had over their playoff destiny.
        The Giants thought that if they won their final two games, they would be guaranteed a postseason berth. But if they finish 9-7 and in a tie with the Eagles and the Atlanta Falcons, the Giants would miss the postseason, thanks to the N.F.L.'s complicated tie-breaking system.
        This is how befuddling the playoff picture is with two weekends left: The Giants could finish 9-7 and miss the playoffs, or they could go 7-9 and make them. They could even clinch a playoff spot with a victory against the New Orleans Saints on Sunday and the right concoction of wins and losses by other contenders.
        Coughlin, so focused on his message of improvement during a team meeting Monday, did not mention to the players that they lost control of their playoff fate -- the one ray of optimism that had emerged from Sunday's loss. Reporters broke the news that even two victories might not be enough, but it did not seem to faze the players.
        There is such a sense of self-flagellation -- part of the Giants' predictability is that they never concede that they have lost to a better team -- that the Giants would seem to view a 9-7 finish without a playoff berth as a somewhat appropriate fate.
        They view the standings and see themselves with a record that is the epitome of mediocre. They are ranked 11th in offense, 20th in defense, an average equation among the 32 N.F.L. teams. They are 15th in turnover margin. Their quarterback, Eli Manning, is 16th in passer rating.
        The Giants are, by most definitions, an average team. That is an uncomfortable assessment, because it means that they overestimated themselves or they are underachieving.
        ''We are what we are,'' linebacker Brandon Short said. ''Are we better than a 7-7 team? I mean, I feel like our talent level is better than that. But I'm sure the teams with the worst records in the N.F.L. feel like their talent is better than what their record is, too.''
        The Giants would like to think that a victory against the Carolina Panthers two Sundays ago is a sign of what they can be, but when it is surrounded by five losses, it looks more like an aberration.
        The Giants are trying hard to view themselves as the Giants of September and October, not November and December.
        ''The ray of hope is that we have that championship-type ability,'' tackle Bob Whitfield said, offering what threatens to become the season's epithet. ''We just have to show it more often.''
        EXTRA POINTS
        Defensive end Michael Strahan, who has missed six games with a sprained foot, said during his weekly radio show that his chances of playing Sunday were 50-50. Strahan, who did not practice last week but went through three days of light drills without pads, wanted to play against the Eagles but was a game-day scratch. The Giants want to be sure that when Strahan returns, he is healthy enough to play multiple games -- including the playoffs, should the Giants make them.
        FOOTBALL
      