
        Newt Gingrich is not running for president, at least not yet. He has set his sights much higher.
        Mr. Gingrich's mission, as he sees it, is to save American civilization from the gravest crisis it has confronted since the Civil War. He has also set as a goal what he calls the restoration of God to a central place in American government and culture.
        If, as a result of these endeavors, the American people should choose Mr. Gingrich to be their leader, he suggests, so be it. But, for the time being, he says he is not actively seeking the presidency, though he often appears to be.
        Mr. Gingrich, 63, the speaker of the House from 1995 to 1998, now disdains mere politics as a distraction from what he characterizes as mortal challenges facing the United States. Prospective presidential candidates of both parties are wasting time and money at this stage of the election cycle hiring staffs, mapping strategy and courting voters, he said. Instead of doing the things typical presidential candidates are doing, Mr. Gingrich's focus is elsewhere.
        ''Taken together, the challenges we face are greater than any since 1861,'' Mr. Gingrich said in an interview Friday in his Washington office. ''No party, no movement has a grip on the scale of the changes we need to make to survive as a civilization. The most important slogan for the next quarter-century is 'Real change requires real change.' ''
        Mr. Gingrich has had plenty of experience in politics, having served in Congress for 20 years, bringing Republicans to a majority in the House for the first time in 40 years in 1994. That majority fell last month, brought low in part by partisan warfare and scandal, eight years after Mr. Gingrich himself was ousted for some of the same sins.
        And while Mr. Gingrich at the moment is not hiring consultants and opening exploratory committees, others are. Analysts and even some friends of Mr. Gingrich warn that he is losing ground that will be hard to make up if he enters the race later.
        But as other non- and quasi-candidates have demonstrated over the years, even toying with a presidential run can attract lots of attention, and with it a soapbox from which to promote an agenda.
        In Mr. Gingrich's case, the agenda includes a new political action committee to try to identify changes America must make to survive. It is an effort that he said would be 50 times as ambitious as the political action committee Gopac, which in the 1980s and '90s he turned into a training ground for hundreds of Republican politicians and a personal fund-raising fief. It will be, in Mr. Gingrich's telling, the 1994 Contract With America, which swept Republicans into power on Capitol Hill and him into the speaker's chair, on an extra-large scale.
        The new committee, called American Solutions for Winning the Future, will be organized as a so-called 527 group, he said. Those committees, named for a section of the tax code, can raise and spend unlimited money with minimal disclosure.
        Mr. Gingrich said he would try to raise tens of millions of dollars through the committee to find bipartisan solutions to the nation's problems. Any candidate of any party who wants to share in the effort will be welcome, he said.
        The committee will also promote Mr. Gingrich's latest manifesto, a 10-point Contract With America for the 21st century, which includes Social Security privatization, electoral reform, radical streamlining of government, and ''patriotic education'' for schoolchildren and immigrants. The document also includes a call to ''recenter America on the creator from whom all our liberties come'' and to appoint judges who understand ''the centrality of God in American history.''
        As for his presidential ambitions, Mr. Gingrich said he would not make a decision before September. He acknowledged that that was late to begin a serious presidential run in the current system, but noted that John F. Kennedy did not declare his candidacy until January 1960 and that Ronald Reagan entered the 1980 race in November 1979.
        The Gingrich plan would seem to depend on one or more of the leading Republican presidential hopefuls -- Senator John McCain of Arizona, former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York and Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts -- falling by the wayside and a groundswell of support for Mr. Gingrich.
        Many analysts, including some close friends and advisers of Mr. Gingrich, consider that unlikely.
        ''Waiting for the voters to come to him is a mistake, because it just doesn't happen,'' said Frank Luntz, a political strategist who worked closely with Mr. Gingrich in his days in Congress. ''When you want to engage in a battle of ideas, you have to engage in a longer campaign.''
        Joe Gaylord, who was Mr. Gingrich's lieutenant when he led the 1994 takeover of the House, said that Mr. Gingrich was more widely known than most of the other potential Republican candidates, but that his image might need some repair. ''He has huge name ID,'' Mr. Gaylord said, ''but maybe there needs to be a little rebranding that goes with that.''
        Mr. Gaylord did not elaborate, but even Mr. Gingrich's friends said he would carry a lot of baggage into any political race. Two highly publicized divorces. A record $300,000 fine imposed by the House ethics committee over the financing of a college course he taught while in Congress. The 1995 government shutdown. A proposal to place fatherless children in orphanages. The bitter politics surrounding the impeachment of President Bill Clinton in 1998.
        Mr. Gingrich acknowledged that he was probably better at formulating ideas than at carrying them out, more of a revolutionary agitator than an elected executive. He said that unexpected events swept him into the speaker's office -- though he had spent years planning to get there -- and that the same could happen with the Oval Office.
        ''It all depends on whether the movement I'm building gets big enough and how large the vacuum of leadership is,'' he said.
        Merle Black, a professor of government at Emory University and an authority on Southern politics, said Mr. Gingrich was dreaming. His appeal is limited to a relatively narrow slice of right-wing voters, Professor Black said, with virtually no support from independents and Democrats.
        ''He couldn't get elected to statewide office in Georgia,'' Professor Black said, citing a recent poll of Georgia Republicans that placed Mr. Gingrich a distant third in presidential preference in his home state, behind Mr. Giuliani and Mr. McCain. ''I cannot imagine him winning a presidential race in the United States.''
        Running or not, expect Mr. Gingrich to remain in the public eye. He has narrated a special, ''One Nation Under God: Religion and History in Washington, D.C.,'' to be broadcast on Fox News this weekend, and he will appear on ''Meet the Press'' on NBC on Sunday to talk about his new organization and his political plans.
        ''My hope is that we'll have a genuine dialogue over the next year,'' he said in the Friday interview. ''Then we can get into the political debate.''
      