
        The Rangers were pinned in their own end for most of the first period Thursday night, and their winning streak appeared to be in jeopardy. Goaltender Henrik Lundqvist was being used for target practice by the Dallas Stars, who outshot the Rangers, 16-4, and appeared to own an unlimited supply of momentum.
        Only Lundqvist's stellar play kept the Stars from initiating an early rout. And in a microcosm of the Rangers' workmanlike season, center Matt Cullen continued his return to form, scoring twice, and defenseman Karel Rachunek suddenly surfaced with his first two goals of the season in a 5-2 victory at American Airlines Center.
        ''They had a lot of big chances,'' Lundqvist said. ''It was a tough start. We knew they'd come hard. They haven't scored much lately, and they got a lot of power plays on us.''
        On a night of backslaps and votes of confidence from the team's owner, the Rangers picked an appropriate time to awake from a sluggish start.
        They won their fifth consecutive game -- their eighth in their past 11 -- and this one came after Steve Mills, the president of MSG Sports, said that Coach Tom Renney's contract extension would last beyond this season.
        ''A month or so ago, we'd have found a way to lose a game like this,'' Renney said of the Rangers, who were outshot by the Stars, 45-20. ''Now we know how to win them. That's what personality is all about, about being galvanized as a team. We'll need all of that down the road.''
        James L. Dolan, the Madison Square Garden chairman, offered some specifics about another member of the Rangers' hierarchy -- Glen Sather, the team's president and general manager. Dolan said that Sather's tenure is open-ended.
        Amid the warm and fuzzy news, the first-place Rangers moved 4 points ahead of the Devils in the Atlantic Division.
        Rachunek's first goal was shorthanded and gave Rangers a 1-1 tie after first period. Cullen's resurgence -- he has scored three of his seven goals in the past two games -- kept the Rangers in front at key junctures. His wrist shot from the left side of the net caromed off goaltender Mike Smith's stick and bounced between his legs for a 2-1 lead 57 seconds into the second period.
        Cullen's second goal came 1 minute 44 seconds into the third period on another wrist shot through Smith's legs and gave the Rangers room to breathe with a 3-1 cushion.
        ''We've gotten some unbelievable goaltending and timely scoring,'' Cullen said.
        Moments after his goal, Sergei Zubov scored his second goal of the game and cut the Stars' deficit to 3-2.
        From there, Lundqvist was left to finish what he started. Much like the game's first power play, when he turned back seven shots, including a breakaway by Jussi Jokinen, several point-blank tries and a slap shot off the post, he was the spark for the Rangers' defense .
        ''That's M.V.P. goaltending,'' Renney said. ''That's All-Star goaltending. That's Stanley Cup goaltending.''
        The Stars had 11 power-play tries but scored only twice. The Rangers were 1 of 4 on power plays.
        The Rangers have allowed only seven goals during their winning streak. Offensively, they took apart the league's No. 2-ranked defense; the Stars had been allowing 2.13 goals a game coming into the game.
        ''We feel confident we know we can play well against good teams,'' Lundqvist said. ''When you make a couple of good saves early on, the guys see that and get fired up.''
        SLAP SHOTS
        Steve Mills said the Rangers are looking to buy a minor league East Coast Hockey League franchise and move it to Brooklyn, presumably to play at the proposed Atlantic Yards development.
        HOCKEY
      