
        The 4-year-old girl who accompanied me to the new holiday-season production of ''Annie'' at the Theater at Madison Square Garden was entranced by the show. (But she was a little concerned about Annie's dog, Sandy, played by Lola, being left alone on the streets of New York.) The 4-year-old girl in the row behind us slept through most of Act II. Well, at almost three hours (including a generously lengthy intermission), it's a bit long. But after a shaky start, this ''Annie'' is also an elating piece of family theater that deserves to become the mass-entertainment holiday staple it aspires to be.
        This is not to say the show is perfect. Far from it.
        Star billing goes to Kathie Lee Gifford as the detestable orphanage director, Miss Hannigan. Ms. Gifford, who became a household name in 15 years as co-host with Regis Philbin of the daytime television talk show ''Live,'' proves one thing here: She can sing. Yes, well enough for Broadway.
        Unfortunately her acting skills fall short. Ms. Gifford mugs her way through the role, as if she were doing a comedy skit with Mr. Philbin. Playing it big might seem a smart choice in this cavernous theater, but the effect in Ms. Gifford's case is of bad vaudeville. She seems determined to remind the audience at every possible opportunity that she is not really a haggard, pathetic, dowdy middle-aged woman in ugly shoes.
        And there is not nearly enough of Sandy, who receives the show's first completely heartfelt round of applause when he responds to his new name, saving himself from the dogcatcher.
        Annie herself (Marissa O'Donnell) is charming and has a lovely voice, which is all the more appealing because it sounds like a child's even when it soars at the end of ''Tomorrow'' (''You're only a daaay aaawaaay'').
        But it is Conrad John Schuck as the busy billionaire Oliver Warbucks who brings ''Annie'' alive. He makes ''N.Y.C.,'' about the glories of life in 1930s Manhattan, the showstopper. At least until the group rendition of ''Tomorrow,'' sung by Franklin D. Roosevelt (Allan Baker) and his entire staff, which inspires them to create the New Deal and the W.P.A.
        Mr. Schuck is best known as Rock Hudson and Susan Saint James's co-star on the 1970's television series ''McMillan & Wife'' and as the distraught Painless Pole Waldowski in Robert Altman's classic 1970 film ''MASH.'' His Warbucks is comically oblivious to many aspects of the real world but full of feeling.
        The show doesn't look promising right away. The orphans' first big number, ''It's a Hard Knock Life,'' about the travails of institutional living, is not the toe-tapper it usually is. Nor is Miss Hannigan's ''Little Girls,'' about the same situation seen from an exhausted adult's point of view. Strangely the first sign that this may be a swell show is when little Tessie (Brandy Panfili) says, ''Oh my goodness'' (Make that ''Oh. My. Goodness'') for the first time.
        But the music, by Charles Strouse, and the lyrics, by Martin Charnin, are terrific, and they soon sweep us up. That means not only the obvious big numbers but also songs like ''Maybe,'' Annie's wistful reverie on the parents who left her at the orphanage 11 years before and how great they must be. (''I'll bet they collect things like ashtrays and art.'')
        ''Easy Street'' is a rousing piece of wishful thinking on the part of Miss Hannigan; her ne'er-do-well brother, Rooster (Scott Willis); and Rooster's moll of a girlfriend, Lily St. Regis (Ashley Puckett Gonzales), even though this is far from a great rendition.
        ''I Think I'm Gonna Like It Here,'' led by Annie and Grace Farrell (Elizabeth Broadhurst), has immense charm, making it clear why Warbucks should promote Grace from secretary to wife.
        ''You're Never Fully Dressed Without a Smile,'' the bouncy number sung by various characters, including the unappreciated radio performer Bert Healy (Christopher Vettel), makes the Depression look like a cheerful time to live. In this number the orphans come into their own too, finally achieving group adorability. Molly (Anastasia Korbal), the littlest orphan, has some nice moments here and there.
        Mr. Charnin, who directed the original 1977 Broadway production, directs this one with obvious affection. The book, by Thomas Meehan, is sentimental but not always painfully earnest. When Annie first sees Warbucks's home, she asks: ''Do you really live here? Or is this a train station?''
        Actually his house, in its first appearance, looks a little like Emerald City. Pretty much everything in the sitting room and everything the servants are wearing is green. In the final scene the audience sees the grand staircase and the giant Christmas tree in a different part of the mansion. The sets are by Ming Cho Lee.
        Jimm Halliday's costumes, blended with Theoni V. Aldredge's original costume design, are handsome. But Annie's transformation into truly loved little rich girl with curly hair and that odd red dress (patterned after the one the newspaper comic-strip Annie wore every day) has never looked more like the beauty and fashion makeover from heck.
        Annie
        Book by Thomas Meehan, based on ''Little Orphan Annie''; music by Charles Strouse; lyrics by Martin Charnin; directed by Mr. Charnin; original Broadway musical staging by Peter Gennaro; choreographed by Liza Gennaro; sets by Ming Cho Lee; original costume design by Theoni V. Aldredge; lighting by Ken Billington; sound by Peter Hylenski; musical direction, supervision and additional orchestrations by Keith Levenson; music coordinator, John Mezzio; additional costumes by Jimm Halliday; hair design by Bernie Ardia; production supervisors, Jason Juenker and Jon Harrington; general managers, Gregory Vander Ploeg, Dawn Marie Bernhard and Gentry & Associates; production stage manager, Molly Meg Legal; company manager, Ken Leist; animals trained by William Berloni; executive producer, Kary M. Walker. Presented by NETworks Presentations, Rodger Hess and TC Theatrical. At the Theater at Madison Square Garden, Seventh Avenue at 32nd Street; (212) 307-7171. Through December 30. Running time: 2 hours, 30 minutes.
        WITH: Kathie Lee Gifford (Miss Hannigan), Conrad John Schuck (Oliver Warbucks), Elizabeth Broadhurst (Grace Farrell), Ashley Puckett Gonzalez (Lily St. Regis), Scott Willis (Rooster Hannigan) and Marissa O'Donnell (Annie).
        THEATER REVIEW
        Correction:  December 15, 2006, Friday  A theater review on Tuesday about ''Annie,'' at the Theater at Madison Square Garden, misstated part of a lyric of the song ''Tomorrow.'' It goes ''You're always a day away'' -- not ''You're only a day away.''
      