
        IF you happened to see Page Six of The New York Post on Thursday, you would have noticed a provocative cartoon: eight shady-looking executives, wearing black eye masks and smoking cigarettes, were holding a board meeting.
        Their company? Goldman Sachs. The caption read: ''What's next on our agenda? Oh yes, our end-of-the-year bonuses.''
        You probably know by now that Goldman Sachs, Wall Street's golden child, is paying its employees what seems like a king's ransom: a total of $16.5 billion in compensation. That equates to $623,418 for every employee. Several top traders are said to have made as much as $100 million.
        To some, it seems almost criminal.
        ABC News tallied up all the things that $100 million could buy. ''You could feed about 800,000 children for a year ($60 million), recreate the Tom Cruise-Katie Holmes and Brad Pitt-Jennifer Aniston weddings four times over ($16 million), buy one of Mel Gibson's private islands ($15 million), and still remain a millionaire nine times over,'' ABC News reported.
        In London, Goldman's office cleaners threatened to strike. ''Whilst bankers at Goldman Sachs will be splashing out on second homes, cars and polo ponies with their multimillion-pound bonuses, cleaners at Goldman Sachs are being squeezed by staff cutbacks,'' Tony Woodley, general secretary of the Transport & General Workers' Union, which represents the cleaners, told BBC News.
        Driss Ben-Brahim, a top Goldman trader who according to press reports collected $98 million, was stalked by paparazzi outside his home in London. One of Goldman's holiday parties was mocked for its lavishness when it was reported that some of its managing directors anted up $10,000 each to pay for it.
        As the cleaners and others have vented their outrage, one group has stayed largely silent on Goldman's largess: its shareholders.
        And they ought to be up in arms.
        What's that, you say? What does a shareholder of Goldman Sachs have to complain about? After all, its stock is up 61 percent so far this year with dividends reinvested. Goldman made a profit of $9.4 billion in its 2006 fiscal year ended Nov. 24, nearly as much as it did in the last two years combined.
        And Goldman Sachs has taken great pains to tell investors that as a percentage of revenue, the compensation costs for its 26,467 full-time employees are actually lower than those of many of its counterparts. This year, the firm spent 43.7 percent of its revenue on compensation and benefits, compared with 46.6 percent last year. That's lower than Lehman Brothers, for example, which spent 50.1 percent of its revenue this year on compensation. Last year, Merrill Lynch spent about 49 percent of its revenue on compensation; Morgan Stanley, on the other hand, devoted 41.8 percent of its revenue to paying employees.
        Using a different yardstick, however, Goldman's pay seems completely out of whack with its peers'.
        Goldman's compensation per employee, as mentioned earlier, is about $623,418. That's nearly double what the average employee at rival firms earns. Lehman spent the equivalent of about $314,000 for every employee, and Bear Stearns spent about $320,000.
        You could argue that Goldman Sachs makes its money more efficiently, and it does. You could argue that Goldman Sachs is in a different business than its rivals, and in some sense, it is: its biggest profits come from trading, not from investment banking.
        But are its employees so much more talented than the rest of Wall Street that they deserve a ''Goldman premium'' of such huge proportions? That's a tough case to make.
        Yes, there is a competitive marketplace for talent, and the proliferation of hedge funds has only intensified the fight for top people. Some of Goldman's superstars could quit, either for a hedge fund or to start their own fund, and make far more money.
        But a vast majority -- especially those who are being paid at the mid- to top end -- could not.
        And for those Goldman employees who appear to be stars within the firm, their stellar performances do not always travel with them when they leave 85 Broad Street. Consider the example of Eric Mindich, a star Goldman trader, who left in 2004 to found Eton Park Capital Management. The firm raised an enormous amount of money based on his track record, and now has $5.5 billion, but its returns have proved to be a fraction of the regular double-digit returns he made at Goldman.
        If Goldman shaved its compensation costs just 6 percent, profits would have been nearly $1 billion higher. The firm could then have issued a special dividend, which would have benefited all shareholders. Many of those shareholders are, of course, Goldman employees.
        DEALBOOK
      