
        The American presidents appearing on dollar coins starting next year may find themselves outshone by their wives: a new series of half-ounce pure gold coins will show all the former first ladies in the order in which their husbands served.
        The front and back designs for the coins, the first long-running series of United States coins devoted to women, were presented this week at the National First Ladies' Library in Canton, Ohio.
        The first four gold coins will go on sale to investors and collectors next May, in time for Mother's Day. Four new designs will be produced every year for at least the next decade, to go with the presidential dollar coins whose designs will show each of the deceased chief executives.
        Authorized by Congress last year, the gold coins, which will not circulate, are officially called the First Spouses series, presumably to allow for the possibility of a female president someday.
        The face of each coin will bear a portrait of the first lady, and the reverse will depict something associated with her. Martha Washington is shown supporting the troops of the Continental Army by sewing a soldier's uniform; Abigail Adams, an early feminist, is writing a letter advising her husband, John, to ''remember the ladies'' in his policy decisions; Dolley Madison is rescuing the cabinet papers and Gilbert Stuart's portrait of George Washington as the British attacked the White House.
        The Mint is taking alternate approaches with the gold coins corresponding to the five presidents who served without a first lady. For example, Thomas Jefferson was widowed when he took office, so the coin that would have portrayed his wife will instead show the flowing-haired effigy of Lady Liberty that was on the half-cent coin at the time.
        The coins are to be the same size as current dollar coins. Although they will have a face value of $10, each will be made of 24-karat gold, so the Mint will sell them for several hundred dollars each.
        Unlike the presidential dollars, which are being produced by the millions for circulation, the First Spouse coins will number only 40,000 each.
      