
        In the tornado of talk about Senator Tim Johnson's political future after his surgery to stem bleeding in the brain, one man has stayed mostly out of sight and mostly silent but for conveying his prayers through spokesmen.
        Gov. Mike Rounds, a Republican whose duty it would be to appoint a replacement for Mr. Johnson, a Democrat, if that becomes necessary, finds himself in his most unlikely political role yet: the single person, potentially, to decide the partisan split of the United States Senate.
        Besieged with questions about whom he might select, Mr. Rounds has declined to address the topic, his aides denouncing the inquiries as premature and beyond impolite and a subject that Mr. Rounds would not have given the first thought to.
        Mr. Rounds had no public appearance on Thursday or Friday, instead attending private meetings in Pierre, his aides said. ''Our concern is for Senator Johnson's health,'' Mark Johnston, his spokesman, said. ''That's South Dakota.''
        Still, even as reports arrived from Washington suggesting that Mr. Johnson's condition was improving, names and theories were quietly emerging here in the chance, however small, that Mr. Rounds were called on to pick a successor. Might he pick a Democrat, to honor Mr. Johnson's political leanings? How overwhelming would the pressure from the national Republican Party be to pick a Republican?
        ''I have to believe there are some private conversations going on about all of this, and that the governor's office is part of those conversations,'' said Robert Burns, a political scientist at South Dakota State University in Brookings.
        Adding to the awkwardness of the spot Mr. Rounds now finds himself in, he had -- long before Mr. Johnson fell ill -- regularly been suggested as the most competitive potential Republican opponent to seek Mr. Johnson's Senate seat in 2008, and perhaps the only Republican who could beat the incumbent.
        Mr. Rounds has denied interest in such a contest in the past, telling reporters he had no desire to move to Washington when he had ''the greatest job in the world'' in Pierre, the town where he was reared, one of 11 children.
        Mr. Rounds, 52, won re-election in November to a second term, defeating his Democratic opponent with 61 percent of the vote. He is popular here, though quiet and without flash -- possibly even less interested in the limelight than Mr. Johnson, who is also known for taking his place in the background.
        Yet in the past year, Mr. Rounds has repeatedly found himself at the center of national attention. Last winter, he signed legislation that would have outlawed nearly all abortions in the state, setting off a wave of fury from abortion rights advocates who succeeded in having the law overturned by voters in November.
        In August, he halted South Dakota's first execution in 59 years, saying the state's statute for carrying out lethal injection did not comply with a more commonly accepted three-drug protocol; the execution has been rescheduled for July.
        And now this.
        State law offers no guideline or restriction about whom Mr. Rounds might pick to fill a Senate seat vacated through ''resignation or death,'' said Secretary of State Chris Nelson.
        Should Mr. Johnson resign or die, ''the fair, right thing for Governor Rounds to do is appoint a Democrat,'' Joy Crane of Sioux Falls said as she sipped a drink in a coffee shop here.
        Her specific suggestion, echoed by several Democrats here, for a successor to Mr. Johnson was Tom Daschle, the former senator who was defeated in 2004. (In an e-mail message, Mr. Daschle said such a hypothetical was needless; ''Tim continues to improve, and we are increasingly optimistic,'' he wrote.)
        Others said Mr. Rounds was certain to choose a Republican if it came to that, particularly given the likely pressure from his party and impact of such a decision on the country.
        ''He's more partisan than that,'' said Dale Hargens, a Democratic leader in the State House of Representatives. ''I've seen him be more involved in local legislative races for Republicans than previous governors.''
        If history is any sign, Mr. Hargens may be right. In 2002, when Dick Hagen, a Democratic state senator from Pine Ridge, died, Mr. Rounds selected a Republican to replace him.
        Among Republicans mentioned in political circles here as possible successors to Mr. Johnson: Mr. Rounds's lieutenant governor, Dennis Daugaard; Larry Long, the attorney general; Dusty Johnson, who won a statewide race for Public Utilities Commission; and several state legislators leaving office because of term limits.
        ''The question to me is whether he would appoint a Republican who would stand a chance of being re-elected in 2008 or would he pick a weaker Republican who would simply hold the place -- and leave the door open for himself or for someone else in 2008,'' Mr. Burns said.
        Still, most political leaders here publicly shunned the topic altogether, saying the state's thoughts should be on Mr. Johnson's recovery, not on Mr. Rounds or his plans.
        ''This is really premature,'' said Scott N. Heidepriem, a Democratic leader in the State Senate.
        Jack Billion, the Democrat who lost to Mr. Rounds in November, concurred, saying, ''Our thoughts have not turned to any of that.''
      