
        The two owners' suites, located side by side above the 50-yard-line at the Louisiana Superdome, are separated only by a generation gap.
        Tom Benson's suite, fully restored with hardwood floors and gold fixtures, is crowded on game days with nuns, priests and businessmen wearing suits.
        Rita Benson LeBlanc's suite, still missing cabinets and countertops, is jammed with celebrities, artists and children of the businessmen next door. Jeans are preferred.
        ''It's always a cool mix,'' Benson LeBlanc said. ''My grandfather just looks over at us and waves.''
        Benson LeBlanc is 29. Tom Benson, her grandfather, is 78. Their tastes in music and design could not be more different. But their bond is as crucial to the future of the New Orleans Saints as the connection between Drew Brees and Reggie Bush.
        Since Tom Benson bought the Saints two decades ago, he has provoked mixed feelings. Alternately viewed as a savior, a cheapskate, a mercenary and a savior again, he is beloved for keeping the team in New Orleans and despised for considering alternatives.
        The Saints' destination, however, ultimately may not be up to him. Benson LeBlanc is already listed as the club's owner/executive vice president, the most obvious signal that she will inherit the franchise from her grandfather.
        Benson LeBlanc occupies a unique place in the National Football League, because of her job title, her age and her sex. The N.F.L. includes only a handful of prominent female executives, and none is as young as Benson LeBlanc.
        She started out as a silent and somewhat anonymous figure in the Saints' front office, usually spotted a few feet behind her grandfather, looking almost like a young assistant.
        Benson LeBlanc had a unique vantage point last season, when her grandfather evacuated the Saints to San Antonio for Hurricane Katrina, refused to promise their return and charged a cameraman during a game in Baton Rouge, La.
        At the end of the season, Benson seemed to recognize that his granddaughter could help improve the image of the organization -- and the family name. He promoted her and coaxed her into the spotlight, where he had never appeared comfortable.
        Benson LeBlanc led the effort to track down displaced season-ticket holders and supported the proposal to sell tickets for as low as $14. The Saints quickly sold out every game in the Superdome and recently pledged not to raise ticket prices next season.
        ''Rita has a lot to do with that,'' Saints General Manager Mickey Loomis said. ''She is still learning, but when her time comes, she has the potential to be a great owner.''
        Grandchildren are rarely pegged as successors to N.F.L. teams. But two of Benson's three children have died at young ages -- a daughter, Tootsie Benson, at 31, and a son, Robert, at 36.
        His surviving child, Renee, who is Benson LeBlanc's mother, runs the family ranch outside San Antonio. His grandson, Ryan LeBlanc, is more interested in ranching than football.
        When Benson became an owner, his granddaughter was in elementary school. Benson LeBlanc lived on the family ranch, but she did not take to the goats and the cows. She befriended neighbors with cable so she could watch the Saints on television.
        By junior high school, she was reading biographies of well-known entrepreneurs like Lee Iacocca, spending free time at her grandfather's car dealership in San Antonio and flying to New Orleans on weekends for Saints' home games.
        After victories, she would follow her grandfather to the middle of the field, hurdling camera cords to keep up. When he did the Benson Boogie, his celebratory parasol dance, he used her as a partner.
        ''I was just like anybody else,'' Benson LeBlanc said. ''I wanted to be around my grandfather as much as I could.''
        She learned the family business the old-fashioned way. In high school, Benson LeBlanc spent summers doing chores at Saints' training camp. After one practice, when Mike Ditka was the Saints' coach, Benson LeBlanc spotted a couple of reporters leaning against Ditka's car in the parking lot.
        ''He's coming,'' Benson LeBlanc warned. ''Get off or he's going to kill you.''
        In college, she interned at the N.F.L. office in New York and earned the nickname Ms. 101, because she always seemed to be asking 101 questions. She would request one minute from her boss and end up taking 30.
        ''We've had a lot of out-of-town interns whose goals are to experience the New York nightlife and show up for work by 10 each day,'' said Joe Browne, the N.F.L.'s executive vice president. ''That was not her. Her curiosity was endless.''
        When Benson LeBlanc attended the owners' meetings for the first time, her grandfather started the day by introducing her. She blushed. The owners chuckled.
        Katie Blackburn, one of the few high-level female executives in the N.F.L., could sympathize. Blackburn's grandfather, Paul Brown, owned the Cincinnati Bengals and passed the franchise down to her father, Mike Brown.
        Over the years, the Browns have taken almost as much criticism in Cincinnati as the Bensons have in New Orleans. But the heat never scared Blackburn. If anything, it inspired her.
        ''When there is scrutiny on your family, you're doubly sensitive to it,'' said Blackburn, the Bengals' executive vice president. ''But what you really want to do is get out there and fix it and get past it.''
        Today, the attention in New Orleans is on football, not the business of football. The Saints, having already clinched the National Football Conference South and ensured themselves at least one home game in the playoffs, will play the Giants on Sunday.
        The Saints owners' suite -- either one -- looks like the place to be.
        PRO FOOTBALL
      