
        Men who take a drug to reduce hair loss may also be reducing their levels of P.S.A., a marker for prostate cancer.
        That may sound like a good thing, but while the drug lowers the level of P.S.A., it does not lower the risk of cancer. In fact, a new study reports, doctors could be misled into concluding that a patient's risk is lower than it really is.
        Writing in The Lancet, researchers said the drug they looked at, Proscar, could halve the blood levels of P.S.A., or prostate-specific antigen. It is not known whether a close cousin of Proscar, Propecia, has the same effect. The study was conducted by Dr. Anthony V. D'Amico of Brigham and Women's Hospital and Dr. Claus G. Roehrborn of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center.
        Because many men consider hair-loss medicines to be ''lifestyle drugs,'' Dr. Roehrborn said, they often neglect to mention them to their doctors. But even if they do, it might not make a difference.
        ''The doctor may just write it down and not put two and two together,'' Dr. Roehrborn said.
        Doctors look at P.S.A. levels, and how they change, to determine whether a patient may have cancer. If the level is high enough, they take a biopsy.
        Proscar, whose chemical name is finasteride, is used in larger doses for men who have swelling of the prostate. It was already known that these higher doses of finasteride lowered P.S.A. levels, and for prostate patients taking the drug, doctors are advised to double the PSA level to have an accurate reading.
        But the study found that even at dosages one-fifth of those used to treat the prostate, Proscar lowers P.S.A. levels. They based their findings on a review of more than 350 men taking it.
        On the other hand, if a patient is taking the drug and then stops without his doctor's knowing about it, his P.S.A. level may spike up, prompting unnecessary concern.
        VITAL SIGNS: SIDE EFFECTS
        Correction:  December 19, 2006, Tuesday  A brief report in the Vital Signs column in Science Times last Tuesday about a study finding that a drug for hair loss appears to lower P.S.A., an indicator of prostate cancer, misidentified the drug. It is Propecia, not Proscar. (The active ingredient in both drugs is finasteride; Propecia offers a much lower dose than Proscar, which is used to treat enlarged prostate glands.)
        Another report in the Vital Signs column about a study of collisions between cars and moose misstated a ranking for Maine, where the study was done. It has the most moose in the continental United States, not the country. (Alaska is first.)
      