
        Harrah's, the world's largest casino company, was near a deal last night to be sold to Apollo Group and Texas Pacific Group for about $16.7 billion, according to people involved in the negotiations.
        However, the talks appeared to have stalled late in the evening over certain contract terms and conditions that could derail an agreement, these people said. Still, they suggested that the two sides expected to continue negotiations today.
        The talks occurred as Apollo Group was involved in another big deal today, the acquisition of Realogy, the real estate franchisor.
        It could not be learned exactly what was the stumbling block in the Harrah's talks, but people involved said it related to closing details.
        ''Some of the points are deal breakers,'' one person said, ''but I think we'll eventually get over them.''
        Harrah's board has been meeting since Wednesday to review two offers for the company, one from Apollo Management and Texas Pacific Group, and another from Penn National Gaming. Harrah's operates casinos under the names of Harrah's, Caesars and Horseshoe in Las Vegas, Atlantic City and elsewhere.
        Harrah's board entered exclusive negotiations with Apollo and Texas Pacific after the team raised its bid this week from $88.50 a share to $90 a share, the people said. Apollo and Texas Pacific had originally approached Harrah's this fall with an offer worth $81 a share, and later sweetened the bid to $83.50 a share, but Harrah's continued to rebuff them.
        After being approached, Harrah's decided to hold an auction, and hired UBS to conduct it.
        Including Harrah's long-term debt of nearly $10.7 billion as of June 30, the bid for Harrah's is worth $27.4 billion, which would make it the fourth-biggest buyout in the United States this year, according to Thomson Financial. The three biggest deals were buyouts of Equity Office Properties Trust, an office-building owner; HCA, which operates hospitals; and Kinder Morgan, an energy company.
        The bidding for Harrah's was the second heated competition for a casino operator this year. This spring, Aztar, the operator of the Tropicana hotels and casinos, was the subject of a bidding war ultimately won by Columbia Sussex for $2 billion.
        But even if the deal is consummated, the two buyout firms must still navigate a thicket of gambling regulations that have stymied many previous such deals. It was only in the late 1990s that Colony Capital, another private equity firm, established a new ownership structure that opened the door to private equity investment. In buying Harveys Casino Resorts, a publicly traded company, Colony caused Harveys to issue two classes of stock, one with voting rights and one with the economic interest but no voting rights. The two principals who controlled Colony owned the voting shares of Harveys, so they were the only individuals required to have a license.
        Since then, several private equity investments using that structure, or variations of it, have won approval in Nevada, a vital jurisdiction in casino mergers and acquisitions, as well as other jurisdictions.
        Shares in Harrah's closed Friday afternoon at $79.50. In after-hours trading last night, the stock was trading up slightly at $79.75.
      