
        Brian Cusworth, the imposing center of Harvard's basketball team, is almost out of time.
        Ivy League eligibility rules and Harvard's specifications have put him in a rare situation in which he must turn in his jersey for a cap and gown this January, just two games into the league schedule. Here is what Harvard (7-5) will lose when Cusworth walks away: team-leading averages of 16.8 points and 8.5 rebounds a game, and 30 blocked shots.
        ''I'm playing my best basketball ever, so it's frustrating that I won't be able to finish up the full ride of 28 games,'' he said in a telephone interview this week.
        At 7 feet tall, Cusworth went to Harvard with more height than most players in the Ivy League. But to hear him tell his story, it was all he had going for him. At 200 pounds, he said, he was a boy playing among men.
        ''I was extremely underweight,'' he said. ''I wasn't recruited by many schools, and I just put myself out there by sending out my video.''
        But by the end of his freshman season, he was proving that he was more than just a tall player in a small league. As a center who could shoot and run the floor, he was touted as one of the league's few N.B.A. prospects and Harvard's first since Keith Webster in 1987.
        Then, his fortunes changed. Over the next three and a half years, Cusworth experienced a string of injuries and had to withdraw from college for a semester. In preseason training before his sophomore season, he struggled with a nagging foot injury that was ultimately diagnosed as a stress fracture.
        Harvard Coach Frank Sullivan said the timing was unfortunate.
        ''Usually that's a very aggressive time for our first-year players,'' Sullivan said. ''So he missed a lot mentally and physically, and there was a great degree of uncertainty because you never know how stress fractures are going to respond.''
        Cusworth sat out the 2003-4 season.
        ''It was a huge blow,'' Sullivan said. ''At that point, we had decided that we were going to center this team around him.''
        Off the court, Cusworth had trouble getting around campus because of the injury. That, and a pressing family situation, prompted him to withdraw from classes the following semester and return to his native St. Louis. Still nursing his foot through the summer, he considered transferring to St. Louis University, but an Ivy League education proved too much to give up.
        ''I had the option on the table, but sitting out a whole season was one of the hardest experiences of my life,'' he said. ''Having to sit out another year as a transfer would have been just too tough for me.''
        He returned to Harvard in the fall of 2004 and spent the preseason trying to make up for lost time. He frequently scored in double figures and earned second team all-Ivy League honors in 2004-5.
        Cusworth worked on bulking up -- he now weighs 255 pounds -- and honing his skills while continuing to fight through injuries. He entered the 2006-7 season with just one semester of eligibility remaining.
        Carolyn Campbell-McGovern, a senior associate director for the Ivy League, said athletes are granted four full seasons of eligibility with room for medical considerations. Players who are injured for a season can seek permission to play during a fifth year if there is a compelling academic reason to stay. At Harvard, however, students have only eight semesters to earn their degrees.
        Cusworth could have elected to play during the second half of this season, when most Ivy League matchups are scheduled, but that would have forced him to take yet another semester off.
        ''He couldn't be around his coaches, he couldn't be around his teammates, he wouldn't do any conditioning at all,'' Sullivan said. ''He wouldn't be able to live at Harvard, and he wouldn't even be able to use the gymnasium.''
        Because Harvard's fall exams take place in late January, Cusworth would not have been available until Jan. 23, nine months removed from his last team practice. Instead, his final game will be against Dartmouth on Jan. 12.
        He said he has come to terms with his situation. Though his original intention was to pursue a medical degree, he is putting those plans on hold and is looking for ways to play as a professional.
        Only 45 Ivy League players have played in the N.B.A., according to ivyleaguesports.com, the Ivy athletics Web site. So European leagues may be a more realistic option for Cusworth.
        ''I want to see if there's anything out there for me as a basketball player,'' he said.
        BASKETBALL
      