
        UNTIL a few years ago, Boynton Beach didn't exactly register as a prime destination. This small South Florida city could hardly lay claim to the well-heeled appeal of Boca Raton, the Mediterranean-minded city to the south, and Palm Beach, the jet-setter's paradise to the north. It even struggled to compete with Delray Beach, its none-too-glamorous neighbor.
        But these days, Boynton, with its population passing 65,000, is no longer stuck in the middle, metaphorically speaking. If anything, it's at the heart of the busy South Florida retiree and second-home-owner social scene, and its central location only adds to its growing status.
        ''The word has gotten out,'' said Bonnie Rayman, a Boynton resident who heads the city's Hochman Jewish Community Center. She moved to the area several years ago, making her a pioneer. Now, she said, everyone is joining the Boynton bandwagon, both in South Florida and beyond. ''The people from Miami and Fort Lauderdale are moving up,'' she said. ''The people from New York are moving down.''
        Not only does Boynton offer the usual amenities popular with the sun-seekers of winter -- beaches, boating, tennis and golf -- it's also beginning to show the makings of a downtown, or at the very least a couple of commercial and social hubs.
        Two projects combining retail and condo-style residences -- the $150 million Marina Village on the Intracoastal Waterway and the $500 million to $600 million Renaissance Commons on an 87-acre parcel formerly home to a Motorola plant -- are starting to give the city a cachet it has long lacked. Traditional suburban-style gated communities, aimed at either middle-class families or retirees, are also flourishing: GL Homes, a developer that has already built at least 10 such communities in the area, is adding three more.
        The growth is being driven by several factors. First, Boynton Beach has more developable land than many other already-filled-to-the-brim South Florida municipalities. Another key: Builders are choosing not to make it an exclusively high-end locale. A home in a new development can still occasionally be had for under $350,000, increasingly a rarity in Palm Beach County, where Boynton sits.
        Boynton also has a measure of Hollywood fame, thanks to the 2005 release of ''The Boynton Beach Club,'' a Susan Seidelman film about the romantic lives of a group of retirees. But even if you don't find love in Boynton, you can find a good bagel -- there's a large Jewish population. And if you're an ex-New Yorker, you can find fellowship among the countless Big Apple expatriates who now call Boynton Beach home or, at least, second home.
        ''You walk around,'' said Rita Buchner, a retired schoolteacher from Long Island who moved to Boynton eight years ago, ''and all you meet are people from the same area you used to live.''
        The Scene
        Boynton Beach is really two towns in one. In the city's incorporated section, all to the east, it's more about the water -- Boynton extends to the Intracoastal Waterway, which separates the mainland from the beach, and through to the Atlantic Ocean, even though most of the oceanfront land in the Boynton area belongs to smaller municipalities, including Ocean Ridge and Gulf Stream. (Boynton does, however, have its own well-maintained beach, with discounted parking for city residents.)
        Development is happening in and near the water, with Marina Village a prime example. The city hopes to improve on its seaside-town character even as it adds a splash of urban sophistication. ''Boynton still has a lot of that Old Florida charm,'' said Lisa Bright, who heads the Boynton Beach Community Redevelopment Agency.
        Just visit the marina that's home to two of the city's most popular open-air restaurants -- Two Georges and Banana Boat -- and you'll see what Ms. Bright means. This is very much the Sunshine State that Jimmy Buffett immortalized in ''Margaritaville'': a sunny spot with a kick-back attitude. (And Two Georges, by the way, makes a mean frozen margarita.)
        The other Boynton is a few miles west -- the unincorporated section that's both a bedroom community for middle-class families and a haven for active, social-minded retirees and seasonal residents. And this is suburban South Florida, with a decidedly New York and Jewish accent. There are a handful of synagogues in the area as well as the Hochman Jewish Community Center, whose membership has grown by more than 70 percent since it opened eight years ago. Indeed, a 2006 study by two local Jewish federations showed that Boynton had the fastest-growing Jewish population in Palm Beach County, which is home to the country's fourth-largest Jewish community.
        ''Jewish people thrive on being surrounded by Jewish people,'' said Rabbi Geoffrey Botnick of Temple Torah in Boynton Beach. He said the city's population revels in hearing ''Yiddish thrown around'' and eating traditional Jewish foods. ''It adds to the texture,'' he said.
        Between these two Boyntons are neighborhoods of older homes as well as a mostly commercial strip -- Congress Avenue -- of shops and restaurants. The latter is where the Renaissance Commons project is taking root. Jim Comparato, president of Compson Associates, Renaissance's developer, said that when completed, the project will give the city a focal point, with particular emphasis on fine dining.
        ''We also have a gourmet supermarket coming in,'' he said.
        Pros
        If you crave the South Florida sun-and-sand lifestyle, Boynton has it in abundance. In the retirement communities, often called ''active adult'' communities -- in keeping with the more youth-oriented outlook of today's seniors -- there's plenty to do without venturing beyond the gates. Activities range from seeing shows in the clubhouse theater (many Vegas-style entertainers still play the condo circuit) to attending fund-raising events for charitable organizations.
        There's the convenience factor, too: whatever Boynton is missing can be found within a 30-minute drive, from the museums and concert halls of Palm Beach and West Palm Beach to the ritzy shopping of Boca Raton. ''You're in the middle of everything,'' said Barbara Resnick, another retired schoolteacher from the New York area -- Rockland County -- who moved to Boynton.
        Cons
        Boynton may eventually have that downtown of its dreams, but right now, it still feels like the classic example of a city with no ''there'' there. The strip-mall-filled terrain can be more than a little off-putting to city dwellers who favor pedestrian-friendly streets. And if you're looking for culture, good luck: the closest thing you may find within the city is the occasional bar band entertaining the crowds at the Banana Boat.
        Another negative: Given that many of Boynton's newest residents are flocking to the unincorporated western area, the Beach in the city's name is a bit of a misnomer.
        Oh, and there is that small meteorological phenomenon known as hurricane season. Hurricanes Frances and Jeanne (both 2004) and Wilma (2005) caused considerable damage. This August, Hurricane Ernesto had weakened to tropical-storm status by the time it struck.
        The Real Estate Market
        While the rest of the South Florida housing market has been in a profound slump after years of growth, Boynton has held its own, local real estate agents say. That means, of course, that the city is no longer the bargain it once was.
        In the new developments -- particularly those by GL Homes -- prices can start as low as $309,900, according to Mark Meeske, GL's vice president for planning in its Florida division. But at Canyon Springs, a family-oriented GL community, they can go for $1 million or more.
        As for new condos to the east, there's often less sticker shock (but often less living space, too). Prices for a one-bedroom at the San Raphael development within the Renaissance Commons project start around $235,000, according to the sales office.
        Resales can be cheaper, but if you want anything near the water, expect to pay a lot, said Barbara Barlage, an agent with ReMax Direct in Boynton Beach. A single-family home ''with a peek'' of the Intracoastal can easily run above $1 million, she said.
        LAY OF THE LAND
        POPULATION -- 66,885, according to a 2005 Census Bureau estimate.
        SIZE -- 16 square miles.
        WHO'S BUYING -- Retirees from the New York area looking for a winter or year-round South Florida residence. Middle-class families within South Florida are also moving to Boynton Beach, attracted by the relatively affordable housing.
        GETTING THERE -- Boynton is about a 20-minute drive from Palm Beach International Airport in West Palm Beach. The city is accessible by Interstate 95 or Florida's Turnpike, which are the two major north-south highways on South Florida's east coast.
        WHILE YOU'RE LOOKING -- Chain hotels within the city include a Hampton Inn & Suites (1475 West Gateway Boulevard, 561-369-0018; www.hamptoninn.com) and a Holiday Inn (1601 North Congress Avenue, 561-737-4600; www.holidayinn.com). For something more upscale, head south to Boca Raton or north to West Palm Beach and Palm Beach.
        THREE FOR SALE
        Like Margaritaville, but With Gated Active-Adult Communities
        Information on properties was supplied by the listing companies.
        WHAT -- 2-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $349,900
        This house is in an established adult community with a pool, clubhouse and exercise room. Taxes in 2005: $2,150. Association fees: $264 monthly. Agent: Dennis D. Nelson, Keyes Company; (561) 202-7151; www.thenelsonrealtygroup.com.
        WHAT -- 2-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $667,000
        This house, in a new adult community, has two and a half bathrooms and is on a waterfront site. It has several upgrades, including granite countertops; the community has a clubhouse and other amenities. Estimated taxes: $11,600. Association fees: $300 a month. Contact: Theresa Fowler, GL Homes; (561) 738-100;www.glhomes.com.
        WHAT -- 5-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $1,149,900
        This two-story house, in an equestrian community with horse facilities and a clubhouse, has a sitting room in the master suite, five and a half bathrooms and a kitchen with granite countertops. Taxes in 2005: $16,178. Association fees: $275 a month. Agent: Julie Peterson, Keller Williams, (561) 252-8965; www. movetowestpalm.com.
        Havens | Boynton Beach, Fla.
      