
        There are four terrific songs in ''Meet Me in St. Louis,'' and Esther (played by Judy Garland in the 1944 movie) gets three of them: ''The Boy Next Door,'' ''The Trolley Song'' and ''Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas.''
        Even without those numbers, though, Bonnie Fraser, who plays Esther in the Irish Repertory Theater's likable new production, would be a standout. Ms. Fraser's voice isn't that strong (she seems to save up breath for each song's final notes), but it's pretty and so is she. Looking like a more delicate Ann Blyth, she would have fit right into 1950s Hollywood.
        Ms. Fraser is matched in looks and appeal by the boyishly gorgeous Colin Donnell as the next-door neighbor John Truitt. Their entrancing stage chemistry is the show's greatest asset, although the entire cast is appealing.
        Charlotte Moore, who directed, sometimes mounts musicals too big for the Irish Rep's tiny stage, and this is one. The title number (terrific song No. 4) is beautifully performed, but at one point during it there are 11 cast members onstage.
        This is a charming portrait of upper-middle-class American family life at the turn of the last century, when the World's Fair was coming to St. Louis, complete with outdoor electric lights. Rose (Merideth Kaye Clark) loves wealthy Warren (Doug Boes). Esther loves John. Little Agnes and Tootie (played by real-life sisters, Danielle and Gabrielle Piacentile), are playing Halloween tricks. Lon (Ashley Robinson), the only brother, is off to Princeton.
        It's pleasant to visit an idealized world in which a family's biggest problem might be whether to have dinner at 5:30 or 6:30 and a vicious dirty trick would be to put some unattractive boys' names on another girl's dance card.
        The three-person orchestra (including the show's musical director, John Bell) does an exceptional job. Tracy Christensen's period costumes are lovely, especially the women's evening dresses in rich jewel colors. The three-foot-tall Christmas tree on Tony Straiges's set seems out of proportion for such a big family, but maybe the whole show could have been similarly downsized.
        ''Meet Me in St. Louis'' continues through Jan. 28 at the Irish Repertory Theater, 132 West 22nd Street; (212) 727-2737, irishrep.org.
        THEATER REVIEW
      