
        If John Smith falls in love with Marie Bakalaka and wishes to become John Bakalaka, should that cost him money? Should his wishes come with so much grief? Wouldn't his family be likely to give him enough of that?
        The American Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit in United States District Court here Friday asking for an overhaul of California laws that dictate the process of changing a name through marriage.
        Under current law, a woman who chooses to change her last name when she marries is not obligated to petition the courts for the change. But, the suit said, a man who wants to take the surname of his wife or prospective wife has to pay at least $320 in court fees and advertise the name change in a newspaper.
        Currently, only six states -- Georgia, Hawaii, Iowa, Massachusetts, New York and North Dakota -- recognize a man's right to change his name through marriage without a court petition.
        The lawsuit was filed on behalf of Michael Buday, who longs to take the name of his wife, Diana Bijon.
        ''It's not about the money,'' Mr. Buday, who works for an advertising firm, said in a prepared statement. ''It's about the principle of families being able to make their own decisions. Diane's dad has become my father figure, and I want to honor that.''
        The couple, who live in Marina del Rey, decided after they were married last year that they would like their family name to be Bijon. But Mr. Buday, who is 29, and his wife, who is 28, told their lawyers that they had been rebuffed by county clerks in his efforts to register the change.
        The California Department of Health Services was named as the defendant in the suit because, said an A.C.L.U. spokesman, Michael Soller, it ''has the authority to create the administrative fix that we're seeking and get the counties to go along.''
        A spokeswoman, Lea Brooks, said the department had no comment because it had not seen the court papers. Mr. Buday and Ms. Bijon did not respond to telephone messages on Friday.
        While neither the civil liberties union nor the Los Angeles County clerk could provide an estimate of how many men seek to change their name through marriage, Mr. Buday is clearly not alone.
        When Antonio R. Villaraigosa, now the mayor of Los Angeles, married in 1987, he went through the court system to change his last name to a hybrid of his own surname, Villar, and that of his wife, Raigosa.
      