
        With mandatory retirement near, the pacer Air Albert seems to be making a statement the only way a horse can. With 23 victories this year, more than any North American horse in harness or thoroughbred racing, he is clearly not ready to be put out to pasture.
        But that is where he is headed. A 14-year-old gelding, Air Albert can race for only another 15 days. Jan. 1 is the official birthday for all racehorses, and any horse 15 or older is not allowed to compete in harness racing. In the meantime, the horse affectionately known as Fat Albert around the stable of his owner, Jim Mayes, seems intent on making the most of his last days on the track.
        Last Saturday, Air Albert picked up victory No. 23 by outrunning the 7-year-old Magical Choice to win a $2,000 claimer at Sports Creek Raceway, a small track in Michigan. He will be back at work tonight at Sports Creek, heading a field of nine in another low-level claimer, this one with a $1,100 purse. Having drawn the No. 9 post, Air Albert will have his work cut out for him in what will be his 384th career start, an astonishing number, but the Mayes family has learned never to underestimate him. If nothing else, Air Albert seems to be a metaphor for a sport that does not register on the national landscape but is not ready to pack it in.
        ''He's a tough horse for 14,'' said Mark Mayes, Jim Mayes's son and Air Albert's trainer and regular driver. ''He's a great horse. He doesn't do anything wrong.''
        That was not always the case. Beginning his career in Florida before heading north to the Meadowlands and Yonkers harness tracks, Air Albert lost his first 24 starts. But he improved and became a solid, if not spectacular, campaigner, racing primarily at tracks in the Chicago area. He had what was then a career-best year in 2000 when he earned $58,229.
        By the end of 2003, Air Albert was a regular at Maywood Park in Illinois, racing for the Tony Morgan stable. But that changed when he sustained a broken leg in early 2004. Because Jim Mayes has a pool at his farm where a horse can swim, Morgan sent Air Albert there to recuperate.
        Sidelined for nearly nine months, Air Albert was eventually ready to go. But Morgan realized that because of Air Albert's age and his injury, it would be hard for him to continue winning on the tough Chicago circuit.
        Morgan offered to sell Air Albert to the Mayes family for $2,000. The Mayeses continued to let the horse swim nearly every day and have placed him only in bottom-level races. It has been a winning formula.
        ''We've tried to keep him in races where we never really have to push him too much,'' Jim Mayes said. ''We've allowed him to race within himself.''
        Air Albert reeled off 14 victories last year. In 2006, he has been even better, winning more than half of his 42 starts while earning $19,670. He has raised his career victory total to 92. In the competition for the most victories in harness racing this year, he is three ahead of his closest competitor, the 6-year-old trotter Tweedle Dum.
        Air Albert's rewards for a job well done include daily swimming sessions and a chance to run around in the fields with the rest of the Mayes horses.
        ''We'll turn him out with other horses between races,'' Mark Mayes said. ''He'll run with them for a while just to show them that he's not too old for that, then he eases off.''
        But all the exercise has not helped with his middle-age paunch. Fat Albert does not miss many meals.
        ''He's definitely not thin, let's put it that way,'' Jim Mayes said.
        Harness horses tend to be more durable than thoroughbreds. Stringtown Wonder leads all thoroughbreds with 12 victories this year. He has started only 15 times.
        While elite thoroughbreds are usually so pampered that they do not run more than five or six times a year, there is no standard retirement age for them, although individual states can impose their own restrictions.
        The rugged Air Albert could probably keep winning -- if he could keep running. But harness racing's governing body, the United States Trotting Association, instituted the mandatory retirement rule to keep owners and trainers from abusing older, infirm horses. Air Albert is one of 74 14-year-old standardbreds to race this year.
        ''I've been in racing for 30 years, and the rule's been around as long as I can remember,'' said Eric Sharbaugh, the association's executive vice president and chief executive. ''My suspicion is that it goes back to a time when a trainer would abuse a horse and race them well past the point they should have. We have so few that make it to that age now that the rule hasn't been looked at that closely in a long time. It's probably a pretty good rule.''
        The Mayes family will give Air Albert to a neighbor, Cyndi Snyder, after his last race and he will become a riding horse. He will be missed around the Mayes stable, but he will not be forgotten. There have been too many memories for that to happen -- 23 this year alone.
        HARNESS RACING
      