
        Herbert Gursky, a leading space researcher for the Navy who, in the 1960s, guided investigations that discovered the sources of X-rays arriving from outside the solar system, died Dec. 1 in Fairfax, Va. He was 76.
        The cause was stomach cancer, his family said.
        Until recently, Dr. Gursky, an astrophysicist, worked at the Systems Directorate of the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington overseeing experiments in solar physics and the preparation of satellites, telescopes and other sophisticated instruments launched to make observations in space.
        He had been acting associate director of research there.
        In the early 1960s, Dr. Gursky was a member of a pioneering scientific team at American Science and Engineering Inc., a private research company in Cambridge, Mass. The team, investigating X-rays and their sources in space, developed an X-ray detector, which they launched and then monitored.
        The device discovered a distant star in the constellation Scorpio emitting more X-rays than visible light. At the time, the Sun was the only confirmed source of X-rays in the upper atmosphere.
        In the following decades, X-rays and their stellar sources became important tools in navigation and in the timing of clocks and instruments carried on spacecraft. Dr. Gursky and others subsequently helped to locate Scorpio through an optical telescope and ultimately to determine its makeup as two stars in rapid orbit around each other.
        A member of the Scorpio team, Riccardo Giacconi, who became a professor of physics and astronomy at Johns Hopkins University and shared a Nobel Prize in physics in 2002 for work in X-ray astronomy, called Dr. Gursky ''a great scientist and man of probity'' who helped the field ''advance to look at a world unexplored.''
        In 1971, Dr. Gursky and others at American Science and Engineering used an X-ray scanning satellite to discover Cygnus, considered to be the first recorded example of a black hole. The phenomenon occurs when stars collapse and create a gravitational pull so inexorable that even light cannot escape it.
        The team identified Cygnus by a telltale and rhythmic release of X-rays detected by Uhuru, a satellite launched the previous year under the direction of Dr. Giacconi and Dr. Gursky.
        Herbert Gursky was born in the Bronx. He attended the University of Miami and earned a master's degree from Vanderbilt. In 1958, he received his doctorate in physics from Princeton.
        After teaching at Columbia University, he joined American Science and Engineering in 1961 and became vice president and director for the company's space research division in 1970.
        Dr. Gursky moved to Harvard in 1973. He was associate director of optical and infrared astronomy at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics from 1975 to 1981. He then joined the Naval Research Laboratory as chief scientist at the E. O. Hulburt Center for Space Research.
        Dr. Gursky is survived by his wife, the former Flora Aronson. They lived in Great Falls, Va. He is also survived by two sons, David, of Las Vegas, and Robert, of Glastonbury, Conn.; a brother, Dr. Martin Gursky, a physicist, of Los Alamos, N.M.; and three grandchildren.
        Correction:  January 31, 2007, Wednesday  An obituary on Dec. 18 about Herbert Gursky, an astrophysicist who studied the sources of X-rays from outside the solar system, referred imprecisely to some of these sources. A distant star he discovered is in the constellation Scorpius, not Scorpio, and the star was designated Scorpius X-1, not just Scorpius. The first recorded example of a black hole, which he and others discovered in 1971, was designated Cygnus X-1 or Cygnus XR-1 -- not just Cygnus. The errors were pointed out on Dec. 19 in an e-mail message that was misdirected within The Times. The correction was further delayed for research.
      