
        Hewlett-Packard said yesterday that its longtime chief financial officer, Robert P. Wayman, would retire at the end of this month and leave the company's board in March. His departure, which he said had long been planned, leaves another board vacancy in what has been a tumultuous period for the company.
        Mr. Wayman, who joined the company as an accountant in 1969, was named to the top finance job in 1984. He served briefly as the chief executive during a period of upheaval in 2005 between the board's firing of Carleton S. Fiorina and its hiring of Mark V. Hurd, the current chairman and chief executive officer. The H. P. board awarded him a $3 million bonus for the 52-day stint.
        When Mr. Wayman became chief financial officer, the company's annual revenues were $6 billion; this year they were $91.7 billion.
        Mr. Wayman, 61, said in an interview yesterday that he had been seeking to retire since 2002 but had been unable to find the right time because of the disruptions of the company's merger with Compaq that year. After Mr. Hurd arrived last year, Mr. Wayman said, they worked together on grooming a replacement and preparing an orderly transition.
        Cathie Lesjak, 47, the company's treasurer, has been named as Mr. Wayman's replacement. She has served in a number of financial posts since she joined the company 20 years ago.
        In trading yesterday, Hewlett-Packard's shares closed at $40.01, up 45 cents. Last month they reached a six-year high of $40.85.
        Mr. Wayman was not implicated in the scandal earlier this year over the company's spying on board members and journalists in an attempt to plug boardroom leaks. Company investigations are normally conducted by a security team that reports up through the chief financial officer. But the leak inquiry was handled by a chain of investigators and private detectives reporting to company lawyers.
        In testimony before a Congressional subcommittee investigating the spying, Patricia C. Dunn, the company's former chairwoman, said she sought out Mr. Wayman in 2005 for help with the investigation. He said yesterday that he had put her in touch with the head of executive security for H. P. but never got involved in the search for a leaker beyond that. ''The spying scandal is unfortunate, but it hasn't affected my job,'' he said.
        Three other board members have resigned this year, all those in connection with the boardroom spying case. The company recently named G. Kennedy Thompson, chairman and chief executive of the Wachovia Corporation, to the board.
        Last week, the company announced the retirement of Richard H. Lampman, senior vice president for research and director of H. P. Labs. Mr. Lampman, 61, had served in that post since 1999. He joined the company in 1971. A successor has not yet been named.
      