
        Maryland's highest court yesterday halted executions in the state, ruling that the state's protocol for lethal injections had been adopted improperly.
        The ruling follows similar developments in two other states on Friday. Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida suspended executions there after a troubled execution that lasted 34 minutes and required a second dose of lethal chemicals, while a federal judge in California ruled that the state's lethal injection protocol violated the constitutional ban on cruel and unusual punishment.
        The Maryland decision, from its Court of Appeals, accepted a technical argument from lawyers for a condemned inmate, Vernon Evans Jr. Mr. Evans murdered two people in 1983 for $9,000.
        The court ruled that the state agencies in charge of executions had adopted a ''lethal injection checklist'' without following the required administrative procedures. New regulations must be published in the Maryland Register, submitted to a legislative committee and discussed at a public hearing.
        The state argued that the checklist was a management tool rather than a regulation. Judge Alan M. Wilner, writing for the court, disagreed, noting that the checklist ''prescribes in considerable detail the actual contents of the lethal concoction and the method of injecting it.''
        Judge Wilner wrote that the court was unwilling to assume, particularly in light of controversies surrounding the death penalty and its carrying out, that the legislature had meant to give the Corrections Department ''unbridled authority to determine and change at will'' how executions are carried out.
        ''Those kinds of decisions do not constitute routine internal management,'' Judge Wilner wrote. ''They affect not only the inmates and the correctional personnel, but the witnesses allowed to observe the execution and the public generally, through its perception of the process.''
        While Judge Wilner noted in passing that the combination of three chemicals used in lethal injections in Maryland and 36 other states had been the subject of several court challenges and that ''some believe it is not as humane as it was purported to be,'' the decision did not address those arguments.
        A separate challenge pending in federal court in Baltimore, similar to the California case, takes direct issue with the chemicals used and the personnel who administer them.
      