
        Take a stopwatch the next time you go in for a colonoscopy. If your doctor performs the procedure too rapidly, he may miss some polyps that could develop into life-threatening cancers. That is the disturbing finding of a study just published in The New England Journal of Medicine, which monitored the performance of 12 highly experienced gastroenterologists in a Rockford, Ill., practice.
        A colonoscopy entails inserting a small scope through the rectum to the top of the patient's colon; the scope is slowly withdrawn while the doctor looks for polyps on the colon's interior walls. Such growths are typically snipped out to preclude the possibility they might become cancerous. If no polyps are detected, the patient is usually told to wait a decade before being examined again because polyps are slow growing.
        But what if the doctor made a mistake and missed a troublesome growth through haste or carelessness?
        The Illinois study, which compared the performances of 12 board-certified gastroenterologists who had done at least 3,000 colonoscopies each, found an astonishing gap in proficiency -- clearly related to the time spent looking. The doctors who spent six minutes or more searching for polyps -- the minimum time recommended in the professional literature -- detected growths at nearly four times the rate of those who did the procedure more quickly. The doctor who took the longest time found polyps 10 times more often than the doctor who spent the least time.
        The study adds to evidence that colonoscopies are far from foolproof. As Gina Kolata reported in yesterday's Times, earlier studies have shown doctors were missing up to a quarter of all adenomas, or precancerous polyps. In some studies, they miss not just polyps but actual cancers.
        The bright side of the Illinois research is the revelation that a busy group of doctors can measure important aspects of their performance, and can use that information to improve. The Rockford group decided to spend at least eight minutes on withdrawing the instrument and looking for polyps -- clocked by a timer with a bell -- and has increased its polyp detection rate 50 percent.
        Smart patients should not hesitate to ask their doctors how their polyp-detection rate compares with national norms, and how much time they actually spend looking for polyps.
        Editorial
      