
        Bill Yosses, a New York pastry chef who trained with France's most prestigious practitioners of the art, appears ready to make a permanent change in his place of employment -- to 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.
        The F.B.I. has been conducting background checks on Mr. Yosses and has told one of his former employees that he was under consideration for White House pastry chef, a job that carries considerable prestige and visibility in the food world. Background checks are typically begun after a job has been offered.
        At the beginning of December, Mr. Yosses was introduced as the guest pastry chef for the holiday season. Since then, according to Bryan Miller, a friend with whom he had written a book, Mr. Yosses has been told by the White House not to answer questions and to direct all queries to the first lady's press office. Mr. Yosses did not return phone calls, and the White House declined to comment.
        Michel Nischan, the chef at the Dressing Room, the new Paul Newman restaurant in Westport, Conn., said Mr. Yosses, who is a consultant there, had spent about a week at the White House. Mr. Yosses and other pastry chefs prepared their specialties for Mrs. Bush.
        ''When he told me he had gotten a call and was going back, I had a gut feeling that he might not be coming back,'' Mr. Nischan said.
        In Mr. Yosses, 53, the White House would be hiring a chef whose creations have been described as ''unfailingly elegant, restrained and imaginative.''
        His range is wide, from the lemon tarts featured at this year's White House Christmas parties to a creation of thin milk chocolate leaves, separating layers of ganache and chantilly cream atop a toasted hazelnut dacquoise, a dessert he served at Bouley Bakery in New York.
        He worked at Bouley Bakery and at Bouley, four-star restaurants in New York, for 12 years.
        Ever since Roland Mesnier retired in 2004 after 25 years as a pastry chef renowned for his skills working with sugar to produce elaborate fantasy presentation pieces, Mrs. Bush has been looking for a pastry chef who could pull and blow and spin sugar. She thought she had found one in Thaddeus R. DuBois, but he left in March after only 18 months in the job.
        Mr. Yosses knows how to work sugar, although there is not much call for it anymore in American restaurants.
        His other pastry skills, however, are highly regarded. One of his former mentors, Pierre Herme, France's premier pastry chef, described one of his creations as the best dessert he had eaten in the United States.
      