
        For the first three years of her basketball career at Hofstra, Vanessa Gidden said she could not get through a practice without casting her eyes toward the banners on display above the Pride's home court, toward the glaring omission over her head.
        ''Before then, I didn't really think of a banner being such a big deal,'' she said.
        Two dozen banners are on display at the David S. Mack Sports and Exhibition Complex in Hempstead, N.Y., but until a few weeks ago, none of them commemorated the achievements of Hofstra's women's basketball team. That was because, in the nearly 25 years since the program jumped to Division I, the Pride had not accomplished much worth commemorating.
        But Gidden and three other seniors have begun to change the reputation of a university that, admittedly, none of them knew much about before they were recruited. Even the departure of Coach Felisha Legette-Jack to take the head-coaching job at Indiana University has not slowed them down.
        After finishing 19-12 and playing in the Women's National Invitation Tournament last season -- an accomplishment worthy of a banner, which was hoisted earlier this season -- Hofstra is off to an 8-1 start under the first-year coach Krista Kilburn-Steveskey. The Pride has won a team-record seven consecutive games, including an upset at Michigan State, which was ranked No. 17.
        At a university where the men's basketball team has gained recognition as a potent midmajor, there is talk of finally hanging an N.C.A.A. tournament banner for the women's team.
        The 57-53 victory over Michigan State, Kilburn-Steveskey said, served as another example of the shrinking gap between the traditional women's basketball powers and programs like Hofstra.
        ''What I tell our recruits now is that we do everything that everyone else is doing,'' said Kilburn-Steveskey, who played at North Carolina State and was an associate head coach at James Madison of the Colonial Athletic Association before moving to Hofstra, another C.A.A. program.
        ''We have gear sponsored by Nike, and we have TV games, and at some point we'll do a trip to Europe,'' she said.
        ''And the fact is, kids don't want to go somewhere and sit on the bench for a couple of years,'' Kilburn-Steveskey said. ''If you want to play in the W.N.B.A., or play on a good team overseas, you want to come in somewhere and play right away.''
        Using that same pitch in 2002, Legette-Jack brought in her first recruiting class, which included Gidden, a 6-foot-3 center who is averaging a team-high 17 points a game, as well as the 6-1 forward Lizanne Murphy (11.4 points, 9.7 rebounds) and the 6-0 forward Lana Harshaw (11 points, 7.1 rebounds). They joined the 5-7 guard Cigi McCollin (13.3 points), a fifth-year senior who was granted a redshirt year after injuring her knee five games into her freshman season. Together, they vowed to change the attitude at Hofstra.
        ''I remember Coach Jack called me and said, 'Do you want to take a trip to Hofstra?' '' Gidden said. ''I said, 'Hof-what?' ''
        Gidden, who played at Stamford High School in Connecticut, visited with Murphy, who is from Beaconsfield, Quebec. At some point, they decided it was worth taking a chance. Harshaw, who played for a Wildwood High School team that won three New Jersey state championships, arrived at the same conclusion.
        Coming out of Christ the King High School in Queens, a traditional city girls basketball power, McCollin said she had several opportunities to sign with major programs. But for her, too, there was something alluring about a place where nothing existed but raw potential.
        ''I wanted to be somewhere I knew I could be a part of something special,'' she said. ''I took a chance. I stayed in New York. And what this class has done is getting people to believe in what we're doing here.''
        The progress has been slow but steady: After going 8-21 in Legette-Jack's first season, the Pride went 14-14, then 13-16, before breaking through last season. But the victory over Michigan State -- where Legette-Jack coached before joining Hofstra -- propelled expectations to a new level.
        ''This has been our plan all along, and now everything's working,'' Murphy said. ''We went into Michigan State fearless. Of course, it helped that because of Coach Jack, we knew a lot of their plays.''
        Despite the success so far under Kilburn-Steveskey -- whom they address as Coach K -- it is taking some time for this team to draw an audience. A crowd of 500 at a home game is considered above average, but compared with what it was like when they started, Gidden said, this is an accomplishment in itself.
        ''My freshman year, I can't remember seeing anybody in the stands unless it was Girl Scout Day,'' she said. ''Then in my sophomore year, for one game, I know it was during a snowstorm, but there were, like, two people in the stands.''
        After that day, she figured, things could only look up.
        COLLEGE BASKETBALL
      