
        WE all know New York is the kind of place where churches transform into dance clubs, and banks into markets, theaters, sneaker stores and spas.
        But banks also morph into luxury condominiums. Twenty-nine of them are now going in at the Apple Bank for Savings branch at 2112 Broadway on the Upper West Side.
        The eight-story limestone building was completed in 1928 and designed by the architectural firm of York & Sawyer, which also built the Bowery Savings Bank (now home to the restaurant Cipriani 42nd Street).
        The Apple Bank occupies the entire block between 73rd and 74th Streets. By February, its seven upper floors will be home to apartments ranging from 1,360-square-foot one-bedrooms to 4,055-square-foot four-bedrooms.
        Wide-plank exotic dark wood floors are already in place, as well as flecked granite in the kitchens. Lower-floor apartments have eight-and-a-half-foot windows and 13-foot ceilings. The six duplexes on the top floors have private interior courtyards, where the building's huge support trusses intersect.
        According to Michele Conte, the Brown Harris Stevens senior vice president who is handling sales, 40 percent of the apartments have gone into contract since the sales office opened in July. Prices range from $1.8 million to $6.7 million.
        Since office tenants began moving out a few years ago, Ms. Conte said, there has been considerable speculation about the bank's future. But that was only to be expected with a building of such size, prominence and elegant architecture, she added.
        ''This is the epicenter of the Upper West Side,'' she said. ''And the location is a reason that sales have been so strong.''
        Other banks-turned-condos include the templelike New York County National Bank branch at 77 Eighth Avenue, at 14th Street, which in 1999 added 11 condos to its top floors. There is also the former Williamsburgh Savings Bank Tower in Fort Greene, Brooklyn, reborn as One Hanson Place, with 189 condos now for sale.
        But unlike those, the Apple Bank project is taking on this new function without jettisoning its original identity. On the ground floor, tellers will continue to cash checks under the 65-foot barrel-vaulted ceiling, where the light from five flickering chandeliers illuminates the words ''Industry,'' ''Thrift'' and ''Prosperity'' carved into the walls.
        The current tenant in the basement, Baseball Center NYC, a 15,000-square-foot batting-cage facility, will also be retained, said Gregg Wolpert, co-president of the Stahl Organization. (The holding company of the condo's developer -- the Stahl Real Estate Company -- also owns the building and batting cages, as well as the Apple Bank chain.)
        Keeping both functioning, however, meant less square footage for the condo's common areas. Apple Bank Condo, as the building is called, will not have basement storerooms. Nor will it have a mailroom; the lobby and exercise rooms will each occupy a relatively small 1,000 square feet.
        Extra closets in apartments and hallways, however, should make some difference, Mr. Wolpert said, and residents' mail will be delivered to boxes by each door.
        Mr. Wolpert says he is also thinking of installing a coffee bar and a Strand Bookstore outlet inside the ground-floor banking area -- to join the Steinway piano rolled in last month for free public concerts.
        ''We're enormously proud of the history and architecture of the branch,'' he said, ''and we want to show it off to our residents and the neighborhood.''
        POSTING
      