
        Rather than roasting in the Caribbean in the summer, Dan Lackey, a car dealership owner from Asheboro, N.C., traded a week of his allotted use of the Ritz-Carlton Club in St. Thomas for a week at the Ritz-Carlton in Aspen, Colo. He liked Aspen in the summer so much that he later bought a one-twelfth share at that development.
        ''There is a variety,'' Mr. Lackey said. ''We aren't always going to go at the same location.''
        Luxury at a lower price. That is the pitch from developers rolling out fractional projects, a high-end spin on the timeshare that offers deeded ownership with amenities and concierge services. And increasingly fractional ownership schedules are offering more flexibility as more hotel chains enter the market, and independent developments link up to allow owners to swap weeks among properties.
        While the real estate market in many second-home markets has stalled this year, new sales of fractional properties are expected to reach $2.3 billion, up from $1.5 billion in 2005, according to Kevin Wallace, the chief executive of Advisory Services at NorthCourse Leisure Real Estate Solutions, a consulting group that studies the fractional market.
        At Boutique Club International, a collection of five fractional residences, owners at the Vanderbilt Residence Club in Newport, R.I., can trade their time for a stay at a waterside resort in Barbuda or for a room at a historic inn in Aspen, walking distance to the ski gondola. Additionally, owners can trade their weeks for time at some 35 other properties that Boutique Club has partnered with for swaps.
        Jay DiGiulio, a founder of Boutique Club International, said he was getting calls from fractional developers eager to link up with a club that will expand their owners' usage options. ''For the first two or three years owners are pretty enamored with where they purchased,'' Mr. DiGiulio said. ''But they do want the ability to go elsewhere as their needs change. That's a big appeal for buyers.''
        And as the fractional market grows, potential buyers and owners are seeing more travel options, with developers now looking at urban markets.
        ''Fractionals remain a very luxury, high-end product,'' Mr. Wallace said. ''They only work where the local real estate prices start to become unattractive for someone buying a second home. Urban markets might make the most sense because where else is real estate more expensive?''
        Last fall the St. Regis Residence Club in New York opened on the eighth and ninth floor of the St. Regis Hotel, selling shares that entitle buyers to 28 days a year of use for $252,000 to $750,000. The-two bedroom units are nearly sold out, but one bedrooms and studios remain on the market, said John Teed, the membership executive. Owners at the St. Regis can use their time at any hotel or resort operated by Starwood, which includes other St. Regis sites, the W Hotels and the Sheraton chain.
        In San Francisco, there are two fractional projects underway that will open in 2007. The Fairmont is building a 54-unit development in Ghirardelli Square under their Heritage Place brand. Fairmont owners can use weeks at other Fairmont hotels and resorts. And the Ritz-Carlton Club, under construction near Union Square, has one-twelfth slices of one- and two-bedroom units starting at $210,000, with twice-daily housekeeping included. Additionally, fractional owners will soon have more swapping options overseas, as hotel companies increasingly develop projects internationally.
        The Fairmont has developments planned for Turks and Caicos and for Zimbali, South Africa. There are also several fractional projects in the works along the Mexican Riviera in Punta Mita, including properties by the St. Regis and Four Seasons.
        Even fractional developments that do not operate under a brand are increasingly joining groups that allow owners to use their time at other fractional properties. The Registry Collection operates similarly to the Boutique Club International. Owners at its more than 60 fractional properties in locations as varied as Truckee, Calif.; Edgartown, Mass.; and Tuscany can cash in their time for stays at other resorts in the collection.
        Home Away
      