
        ONE might think of the modest concrete planters and brick plaza outside Two Grand Central Tower, a bulky 43-story skyscraper on East 45th Street, as Harry Macklowe's private yard, perhaps with a white picket fence out front and a chair and an umbrella.
        At least that was the image evoked by William Beesch, an assistant district attorney in Manhattan, at the trial of Cindy Sheehan, the antiwar campaigner, and three other protesters, who were convicted on Monday of trespassing on the plaza in front of Mr. Macklowe's building, where the United States Mission to the United Nations rents space.
        Mr. Beesch said the plaza was just like home. ''If you had someone in your home who you didn't want there, you would probably be very surprised if you couldn't tell them to leave,'' he said, to objections from Robert C. Gottlieb, a defense attorney. ''Macklowe Properties could, if they wanted to, put in a fence.''
        But it turns out that the plaza in front of Mr. Macklowe's building at 140 East 45th Street, near Lexington Avenue, is far from private, and fences are not allowed. City records show that it was created as a public amenity in 1982, as part of a zoning deal that gave Mr. Macklowe a gift that keeps giving.
        Records show that in exchange for creating a public space, with a promise of 24-hour-a day access for the public, Mr. Macklowe was given a hefty reward: He received permission to include an extra 32,588 square feet of space in his building, enough space to add the last two and half stories to his tower and generate an extra $2.1 million in rent a year, at current market rents of $65 a square foot.
        The trespassing conviction of the four women -- they were acquitted of a series of more serious charges -- has caused some consternation among urban planners worried about these amenities in privately owned public spaces across the city, as well as among civil liberties lawyers concerned about the chilling effect the convictions could have on public protest.
        ''The very idea of trespass here goes against what these spaces are -- members of the public are absolutely entitled to use these spaces,'' said Jerold S. Kayden, a lawyer and professor of urban planning and design at Harvard, who co-wrote a book on New York's privately owned public spaces, in conjunction with New York's Department of City Planning and the Municipal Art Society of New York, a preservation group.
        The police said they arrested the women in response to a request by Mr. Macklowe's security staff, which had refused to accept a petition that the women wanted to give to the mission, and locked the doors to the building instead. Mr. Beesch said that the security staff feared the women might interfere with the operation of the building, although a videotape showed that they had moved away from the front doors at the request of the police.
        But in Mr. Kayden's book, ''Privately Owned Public Space: The New York City Experience,'' a review of the city's public spaces, planning officials offered a different view. They said that developers like Mr. Macklowe ''legally ceded significant rights'' in agreeing to the public spaces, including the ''right to exclude others.''
        Mr. Kayden said in an interview that any reasonable conduct, including protesting and reading a petition, were as protected as they are on public property like parks and public squares, under the First Amendment.
        Mr. Gottlieb, a lawyer for the protesters, said the women were considering an appeal even though the judge, A. Kirke Bartley Jr., let them go without a fine or sentence, on the condition that they stay out of trouble. He attributed the conviction, in Manhattan Criminal Court, to Mr. Beesch's stirring defense of private property.
        He said that Judge Bartley sustained his objection to the prosecutor's remarks, but refused to explain to the jury why the remarks were misleading and would not tell the jury to consider the women's constitutional rights to protest.
        Mr. Macklowe and his son William, the current president of Macklowe Properties, declined to comment.
        But while city rules require signs stating that plazas are open to the public, visitors at Mr. Macklowe's building are now greeted with a phalanx of notices on stanchions, warning them that loitering, trespassing and ''unlawful assembly'' are prohibited on the public spaces.
        BIG DEAL
      