
        For the last decade, residents of northern Montana have been praying for asphalt to stave off the disappearance of their dwindling ranching and farming towns.
        Now, with the election of a senator from rural Montana, they are lobbying with renewed vigor to get the state and federal government to widen all 666 miles of Highway 2 in Montana, a move they hope will keep them on the map. About 40 miles of the highway, known as the Hi-Line, is four lanes.
        ''We're fighting for our life,'' said Bob Sivertsen, an auctioneer in Havre who is president of the group pushing for the highway-widening project, which is known as Four for Two and is estimated to cost more than $1.5 billion. ''We don't want to die.''
        Most businesses, Mr. Sivertsen said, simply will not locate along a two-lane road.
        After a series of setbacks, including a state study in 2004 that found the best option was an improved two-lane highway, advocates of the project see new hope with the election of Jon Tester to the Senate. Mr. Tester, a Democrat from Big Sandy, a fading agricultural town not far from the Hi-Line, has expressed support for the project.
        ''He has supported Four for Two in the past and still supports it,'' said Matt McKenna, a spokesman for the senator-elect. ''Transportation infrastructure is economic development, both when you build it and when you drive on it.''
        Supporters want the proposed four-lane road, which they acknowledge is up against long odds in Washington, to tie into Highway 2 in North Dakota, which is nearly completed as a four-lane route across the state. Mr. Sivertsen said the energy boom in Alberta and Saskatchewan would also make good roads even more important.
        Gov. Brian Schweitzer, a Democrat whose family homesteaded along the Hi-Line near the town of Gildford, also supports the widening.
        The Hi-Line, named after the Northern Pacific rail line that carried Norwegian, German, Swedish and other immigrants west to homestead land, created a patchwork of farms and ranches on the northern Great Plains. But the aridity of the plains was too great to support small farms, and old maps show dozens of towns that no longer exist.
        The population here in Blaine County peaked in 1940 at more than 9,500. Last year the census put it at 6,600. In neighboring Phillips County, the population peaked around 9,300 in 1920 and has since shrunk to around 4,200. The population across the Hi-Line would most likely be far lower if it were not for substantial federal subsidies paid to farmers and ranchers here.
        A staggering blow was dealt the Hi-Line, Mr. Sivertsen said, when Interstate 90 was built through the southern part of Montana in the 1970s.
        Life on the Hi-Line is a constant readjustment to deal with a declining population. Many businesses and homes are ramshackle or shuttered. School districts have been forced to combine. High school football teams play with eight- and six-man teams. Some towns, here and in other parts of the plains, have bought radio stations and stores to operate as they have become unprofitable. Many people have to drive 100 miles or more to get to a good-size grocery store or a doctor.
        There are some bright spots. Hunters flock here in the fall for the pheasants that can be seen along the road scratching gravel. One of the two Indian reservations along the highway is building a casino, and there has been a sharp rise in the local economy the last two years because of energy development.
        Officials with the Montana Highway Department say traffic data and other factors simply do not support the need for a four-lane highway. But supporters say the process is stacked against them.
        ''It's geared in favor of high-traffic areas,'' said State Senator Sam Kitzenberg, a Glasgow Republican who has led the campaign. ''It says if you are not a player, you never will be. They say, 'We're going to give you a widened two-lane and a slow, quiet death.' ''
        Another major lifeline in the northern part of the state, one that faces cancellation on a regular basis, is the Empire Builder, the daily passenger train operated by Amtrak.
        Critics of the expanded highway say the decline of the Great Plains is about more than whether a road is two lanes or four. Frank Popper, a professor of geography at Rutgers who has studied the depopulation of the Great Plains and advocates introducing bison to a restored native prairie to replace heavily subsidized farm land, said he was of two minds.
        ''It smacks of desperation,'' Dr. Popper said. The region is out of the nation's consciousness, he said, and a new road will not change that. He argued that money would be better spent expanding hospitals and tourism. On the other hand, he said, the Interstate system drew economic development.
        Pat Williams, a former nine-term Democratic congressman who now teaches public policy at the University of Montana, said: ''There are some places where the adage 'Build it and they will come' won't work. The Hi-Line is one of those places. Expanding a highway will not attract a significant increase in commerce.''
        Correction:  December 19, 2006, Tuesday  An article on Sunday about efforts to persuade the Montana and federal governments to widen Highway 2 misidentified the rail line in northern Montana that inspired the highway's nickname, the Hi-Line. It was the Great Northern Railway, not the Northern Pacific.
      