
        Four people who had contact here with a business associate of the former Russian agent Alexander V. Litvinenko were hospitalized Monday, on suspicion they had been contaminated by polonium 210.
        The business associate, Dmitri V. Kovtun, spent four days in Hamburg in October before flying to London, where he met with Mr. Litvinenko on Nov. 1, the day Mr. Litvinenko became ill from the radiation poisoning that killed him three weeks later.
        While in Hamburg, Mr. Kovtun slept for two nights in the apartment of his former wife. The police said they had detected radioactive traces on a child's car seat and in two bedrooms, suggesting that the ex-wife, Marina, her two children and her boyfriend had been contaminated.
        The four people in the apartment were not showing signs of radiation sickness, according to a police spokeswoman, Ulrike Sweden, and it will take a few days of tests to determine whether they ingested the substance. She said there was no public health danger.
        The police confirmed Monday that evidence of polonium was found on a seat in a BMW that met Mr. Kovtun at the Hamburg airport on Oct. 28. There were also traces in a second car he had used.
        Mr. Kovtun spread a wide trail of radiation during his brief stopover in this northern German port city. His movements here have become central to solving Mr. Litvinenko's death.
        German prosecutors have begun a criminal investigation of Mr. Kovtun, who is reported to be in a hospital in Moscow, saying there was evidence that he might have illegally handled the polonium 210. He could also, however, have left traces of it after being contaminated himself, the police said.
        The Hamburg police are pressing the Russian authorities for details on Mr. Kovtun's health, with conflicting reports suggesting that he was in a coma, seriously ill or not outwardly ill at all.
        Germany's deepening entanglement in the case could strain relations between Berlin and Moscow, which are close but have changed in tone under a new German chancellor, Angela Merkel.
        In an interview scheduled to be broadcast on German television Monday night, Mrs. Merkel said of the deaths of Mr. Litvinenko and a journalist, Anna Politkovskaya, ''It is not a good sign; it needs to change.''
        She called on the Russian authorities to investigate both deaths aggressively, and said President Vladimir V. Putin had assured her that they would. Ms. Sweden, however, said Russian officials still had not answered questions from the Hamburg police about Mr. Kovtun.
        British officials have complained that Russia is hampering their investigation of Mr. Litvinenko's death. On Monday, the Russian prosecutor general, Yuri Y. Chaika, met with Britain's ambassador to Moscow, Anthony Brenton, to discuss the case.
        Mr. Kovtun, a 41-year-old Russian, was a student in the 1980s at the Supreme Soviet Higher Military Command School, many of whose students went on to serve in the K.G.B.
        If, as the Germans suspect, Mr. Kovtun handled polonium, it would raise the question of how it got to Germany. According to officials here, he flew from Moscow to Hamburg on Oct. 28 aboard an Aeroflot flight. Aeroflot's deputy chief spokesman, Viktor F. Sokolov, said no requests had been made to examine any of the company's aircraft.
        He said that all Aeroflot planes arriving at the Moscow airport operated by the airline Sheremetyevo were routinely inspected and that none had shown signs of radiation. Authorities also found no traces in a Germanwings plane that Mr. Kovtun took to London on Nov. 1.
        In the Hamburg neighborhood where Mr. Kovtun once lived, radiation specialists went in and out of his ex-wife's apartment building, hauling luggage, steel cases and objects in sealed plastic bags.
        In Russia, no officials commented publicly on the disclosures involving Mr. Kovtun. But Russia's ambassador to Germany, Vladimir V. Kotenev, rejected claims that his county was not cooperating. ''We also have an interest in finding out the truth,'' he said on German television.
        Russian and British investigators did begin interviewing Andrei K. Lugovoi, who along with Mr. Kovtun, met with Mr. Litvinenko on Nov. 1 in London. An aide to Mr. Lugovoi, reached by telephone, declined to discuss the meeting, but confirmed remarks that he had made to Russian news agencies.
        ''I was giving evidence purely as a witness,'' he said, according to Itar-Tass. He added that the meeting lasted a little longer than three hours and that he ''gave exhaustive answers to all the questions.''
        Investigators from Russia and Britain also interviewed Mr. Kovtun over three days last week. Afterward, the prosecutor general announced that it had opened its own investigation and that Mr. Kovtun was ill with symptoms of radiation poisoning. He did not answer his telephone.
        A third Russian who accompanied Mr. Lugovoi and Mr. Kovtun during their trip to London, Vyacheslav G. Sokolenko, declined in a telephone interview to discuss the new disclosures, saying he could speak only for himself. He said he had been tested and found to have no exposure to radiation.
        Mark Landler reported from Hamburg, and Steven Lee Myers from Moscow.
      