
        IT seems only a few weeks ago that everyone was assessing the best and worst of advertising for 2005. But here comes the moment to review what happened on Madison Avenue in 2006.
        Time flies, it seems, when you are frantically remaking an industry to stave off irrelevance and obsolescence.
        The big story of the year has been the willingness of mainstream marketers to forgo a decades-long reliance on the traditional media and to embrace new technologies like podcasts, video-on-demand, blogs, social networking and video sharing.
        Sometimes, those efforts were compelling and successful. In other instances, attempts to change old habits went over about as well as Grandma demonstrating how hip she is by leading the wedding party in the macarena.
        Here is a recap of high and low points, in alphabetical order.
        AMERICAN EXPRESS -- Submitted for your disapproval, to borrow from Rod Serling, a commercial for American Express that ran two minutes but seemed to last two hours, which clumsily aped aspects of classic Serling fare like ''The Twilight Zone.''
        The spot was intended as a glimpse into the weird world of M. Night Shyamalan, the director of films like ''The Sixth Sense'' and ''The Village.'' Not only was the story confusing, but Mr. Shyamalan made the mistake of acting in the commercial, which he also directed. He is no Olivier. Agency: Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide, part of the WPP Group.
        BROUGHT TO YOU BY -- Decades ago, a TV series often had a single sponsor, whose patronage helped forge closer ties between audiences and advertisers. Now the lone sponsor rides again as marketers like Ford Motor, Match.com and Nike seek to reap the benefits of branded entertainment.
        The most enthusiastic participant in the trend is Philips Electronics North America, which made sole sponsorships a centerpiece of a campaign in magazines like Gourmet and The Week as well as on television. The highlight of the campaign, called ''Sense and Simplicity,'' was the sponsorship of the Dec. 4 broadcast of the ''NBC Nightly News With Brian Williams'' with fewer commercials and more news.
        The ratings were 8 percent higher than usual, NBC reported, and it received more than 4,000 praised-filled e-mail messages. The next night, Mr. Williams suggested to viewers the idea might return in 2007. Agencies: Carat USA, part of the Aegis Group, and DDB Worldwide, part of the Omnicom Group.
        CADILLAC -- How bad was an elaborate commercial for the Cadillac Escalade sport utility that appeared during Super Bowl XL? So bad that the negative response contributed to a decision by the Cadillac division of General Motors to leave Leo Burnett, the agency that created the spot, for another G.M. agency, Modernista.
        Burnett, part of the Publicis Groupe, and predecessor agencies had produced Cadillac campaigns for 70 years. But that meant nothing after the expensive commercial bombed. The spot presented a blinged-out Escalade as the main attraction at a glossy fashion show.
        Selecting a fashion theme for a commercial shown during the biggest football game of the year makes as much sense as arranging a product placement in ''The Devil Wears Prada'' for Hungry-Man dinners.
        CAVEMEN -- Why is prehistoric man such a preoccupation of marketers? Perhaps it is nostalgia, laced with self-loathing, for a time when there was no advertising. Or maybe because using cavemen in ads is an effective way to mock our complex modern lives.
        One example is the hilarious spots for Geico insurance, owned by Berkshire Hathaway, in which cavemen somehow alive in the 21st century object to their portrayals as simpletons. The commercials are created by the Martin Agency in Richmond, Va., part of the Interpublic Group of Companies.
        Another example is a slapstick spot for FedEx, suggesting that ancient man also worried whether important packages would arrive absolutely, positively the next morning. The commercial, by the BBDO Worldwide unit of Omnicom, was derivative of the 1981 movie ''Caveman.'' But if originality were the only criterion for praising advertising, there would be a house ad in place of this column.
        DODGE -- It was a spirited contest for the most offensive ads of 2006. The runner-up: the annoying spots for HeadOn headache treatment, created internally by Miralus Healthcare. The winner, or loser, as the case may be, was a commercial for the Dodge Caliber subcompact (''It's anything but cute'') in which a fairy encounters a tough guy walking a Doberman.
        ''Silly little fairy,'' he taunts. The fairy transforms him into a yuppie with yapping Pomeranians. The Chrysler unit of DaimlerChrysler, which sells Dodge, and the Dodge agency, BBDO, insisted the commercial was not hateful or homophobic because they were unaware of the double meaning of ''fairy.''
        Perhaps they are also unaware of the double meaning of ''gay,'' as in how gay was the celebration when the top executive for sales and marketing for Chrysler was recently pushed out of his job.
        FLOGS -- A tip of the cap to Tom Siebert, a reporter for MediaPost, for coining the word ''flog'' to refer to a fake blog that poses as a consumer creation but is actually produced by professionals to sell products.
        A notorious flog was exposed last week, when bloggers discovered that a video blog in praise of the Sony PSP was created by Zipatoni, an agency owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies. The video blog pretended to be the work of Charlie, an amateur hip-hop artist.
        Another blog much reviled after its exposure as a flog was created by Edelman, part of Daniel J. Edelman Inc., on behalf of Wal-Mart Stores. The flog posed as the travel diary of a couple, but did not disclose they were paid for their upbeat posts about Wal-Mart. The deception earned a rebuke from the Word of Mouth Marketing Association for violating its code of ethics.
        FOLGERS -- Known for years as a marketer that took no chances, Procter & Gamble has started experimenting with risky efforts like viral online ads. The goal is to appeal to younger consumers who ignore the traditional pitches Procter typically supports.
        For Folgers coffee, Saatchi & Saatchi, part of Publicis, created a video clip that mocked the brand's usual depiction of mornings as the best part of the day. The clip showed a twentysomething, who clearly preferred night life to daylight, being besieged by an impossibly cheerful mob singing a wacky song with lyrics like ''you can sleep when you are dead.''
        Folgers was presented not as a reward for waking up early but as a lifeline for when the morning after comes too soon after the night before. The offbeat message was also delivered on a special Web site (toleratemornings.com).
        GENERAL ELECTRIC -- The General Electric Company was among the old dogs learning new tricks this year, thanks to an elephant named Elli. She was a star of a delightful campaign that carried the theme ''G.E. One Second Theater,'' intended for consumers who use digital video recorders and the MySpace social networking service (myspace.com).
        There was also a smart sequel, ''G.E.'s Imagination Theater,'' featuring short films that can be watched free on the video-on-demand service of local cable TV systems as well as on Web sites like myspace.com, video.google.com and youtube.com. Agencies: Blitz, BBDO and another Omnicom agency, OMD.
        SMIRNOFF RAW TEA -- Parody campaigns were in vogue this year, none more clever than ''Tea Partay,'' a hugely popular viral online effort for Smirnoff Raw Tea, sold by Diageo, that made its debut on YouTube and migrated to its own Web site (teapartay.com). A viral clip deftly spoofed the conventions of rap video with actors portraying the Prep Unit, a crew of rich kids singing about their privileged lives.
        Alas, the agency that produced the campaign, Bartle Bogle Hegarty, soon found it had little to sing about. The agency lost its assignments for Smirnoff Raw Tea and sibling brands to another Diageo agency, JWT, which creates ads for Smirnoff vodka.
        TENNESSEE POLITICS -- The midterm election campaign brought an onslaught of negative commercials, none more nefarious than a spot for Bob Corker, the Republican candidate for the Senate from Tennessee.
        The commercial was composed of vignettes styled to resemble ''man on the street'' interviews about Mr. Corker's Democratic opponent, Harold E. Ford Jr. Actually, the interviewees were all actors, including a sexy woman who exclaimed, ''I met Harold at the Playboy party!'' and returned at the end of the commercial to wink and say, ''Harold, call me.''
        The woman is white. Mr. Ford is black. That set off a furor about coded racism and sponsorship rules for political ads; Mr. Corker disavowed the spot, which was financed by the Republican National Committee. After Mr. Corker won the election, many analysts attributed his victory to the commercial, produced by Scott Howell & Company.
        ADVERTISING
      