
        It's best to look at ''The Taking of Miss Janie'' as an allegory. Otherwise it seems awfully strange that a young woman who has just been raped is sitting up in bed afterward, calmly telling her rapist how disappointed she is in him. (''We've been friends for such a long time.'')
        Ed Bullins, who wrote the award-winning ''Miss Janie'' three decades ago, has helpfully explained in interviews that he considers this couple's relationship a metaphor for race relations. This new production, elegantly directed by Shauneille Perry, re-examines the issues with strong performances and a very political curtain call that is simultaneously sad and inspiring.
        The question, a generation after the play's original run -- first in 1974 at the New Federal Theater, then the next year at Joseph Papp's Public Theater -- is whether things have changed much since then, or since the '60s, when the play is set.
        Surely today you wouldn't hear a white, supposedly liberal college student like Janie (Kate Russell) say, as an indication of her enlightenment, ''I think colored people are neat.'' But semantics can disguise attitudes.
        Janie meets Monty (Royce Johnson), who is black, in their creative-writing class and accepts his invitation to a party. She insists from the beginning that they will just be friends. He insists on calling her Miss Janie, which makes her uncomfortable. In one of the play's several revealing monologues, Monty announces that he intends to get Janie into bed, even if it takes years of smiling and pretending to be pals.
        ''Miss Janie'' is peopled by, among others, a black nationalist (Garrett Lee Hendricks) who wants to be Malcolm X and enjoys calling white people devils to their faces; a young black woman (Alia Chapman) who has recently become a lesbian; and a white Jewish drug dealer (Lee Gundersheimer) who calls himself a ''Zionist junkie'' and tells his black acquaintances, ''It takes a lot of energy fightin' for the rights of you people.''
        Despite outrageous distancing comments like that, Mr. Bullins does not single out his white characters for blame, and Monty is not the only villain. Black characters make anti-Semitic comments, and one refers to the lesbian as ''a freak.'' The failure of the ideals of the '60s, it seems, is just about everybody's fault.
        ''The Taking of Miss Janie'' is at the Henry Street Settlement's Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side, (212) 279-4200, newfederal@aol.com, through Dec. 23.
        THEATER REVIEW
      