
        A POPULAR joke in Iran has someone asking the conservative former president, Hashemi Rafsanjani, what the superhighway under construction north from the capital Tehran to the border will be called.
        ''Shaheed Ahmadinejad Highway,'' he responds.
        Now President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad is very much alive, while shaheed, or ''martyr,'' is the Islamic honor bestowed on anyone who dies fighting for God and country. The joke is one small indication that the factions which govern Iran, riven by endlessly bitter rivalries, are finding the bellicose president tiresome.
        There are other, more significant signs.
        In the days before the general election last Friday for the Assembly of Experts, an 86-member council that might well choose Iran's next supreme leader, some candidates allied with Mr. Ahmadinejad's clerical mentor were eliminated as unqualified. In addition, when the president visited Amir Kabir University in Tehran last week, a small group of students burned his picture and chanted ''Death to the Dictator!''
        The protest was less important than the way it was reported. It was featured on the evening news on state television, which is controlled by the Islamic Republic's powerful, but possibly ailing, supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. Conservative newspapers and the Web site run by the former commander of the Revolutionary Guards also reported it.
        In the tea leaves used to assess the murky, shifting alliances among the mullahs, such publicity seemed to signal that someone fairly senior is less than enchanted with Mr. Ahmadinejad.
        ''There is dissent in Iran,'' said Vali Nasr, author of ''The Shiite Revival'' and a professor of Middle Eastern politics at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, Calif. ''The perspective the U.S. has of Iran being a monolithic country under this demagogue is not correct.''
        The first fissures in Mr. Ahmadinejad's popular image come at a potentially significant moment. The Iraq Study Group recommended that the United States open a dialogue with Iran.
        Other voices in Washington deplored the idea. Many Israelis, including Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, liken Mr. Ahmadinejad to Hitler and the Islamic Republic to the Third Reich, and Mr. Ahmadinejad often seems to validate the comparison by playing to the anti-Semitic gallery. Last week, Tehran hosted Holocaust deniers from around the world, and he repeated his threat that Israel would soon disappear.
        Being seen confronting the West burnishes Mr. Ahmadinejad's populist image at home and adds to his aura on the Arab street, feeding the mullahs' dreams of leading the world's Muslims.
        ''They say Ahmadinejad is standing up to the Americans, he is standing up to the Israelis, and he is defending our rights,'' Akhbar Ganji, Iran's leading dissident, said in a talk at Stanford University this fall. But Mr. Ganji and a number of other Iranian analysts say that the West falls into a trap when it lets Mr. Ahmadinejad set the parameters of any dialogue or even interviews.
        ''Nobody asked him questions about democracy and human rights in Iran,'' said Mr. Ganji, referring to recent exchanges the president had with Western questioners. ''Nobody asked why they kill and imprison dissidents. This is the country's Achilles' heel, and they have no answer.''
        Most Iranian analysts and academics in American universities and research institutes said in interviews that they emphatically supported negotiating with Iran. Some question the wisdom of such talks right now, however, suggesting that the United States needs a long-term strategy for confronting the repressive regime rather than ad hoc discussions based on a need to extract American troops from Iraq.
        First, the Iranian experts reject the comparison with Hitler. President Ahmadinejad, they point out, does not control the armed forces, which lack an air force and a navy anyway. The economy is so decrepit that Iran, a leading oil producer, has to import an estimated 40 percent of its gasoline.
        ''It's time for a reality check -- Iran is a third world power,'' said Ervand Abrahamian, an expert at Baruch College on Iranian opposition movements.
        The correct reaction to the Holocaust denial would be to ridicule it as rank stupidity, he and other Iranian experts say. To compare Mr. Ahmadinejad to Hitler is to assume wrongly ''that he is in charge of Iran and that he is the country,'' Mr. Nasr added.
        It is true that the president was once a Revolutionary Guard officer, and courts the military with important patronage, like allowing its business wing to branch into the oil construction sector. Over all, though, he faces limitations akin to those faced by former President Mohamed Khatami: the main levers of power -- the 450,000-man armed forces, the judiciary and the state-run broadcasting service -- all report to the supreme leader, Ayatollah Khamenei.
        There has been a strange reversal in American perceptions, Mr. Nasr said. When the somewhat moderate Ayatollah Khatami was president, talking to him was dismissed as wasting time because the supreme leader was the real power. Now that Mr. Ahmadinejad inhabits the same office, with the supreme leader still holding the same key powers, Mr. Ahmadinejad is being portrayed as the crux.
        Mr. Ganji, who recently emerged from six years in jail, expressed amazement that American institutions like the Council on Foreign Relations and ''60 Minutes'' on CBS News let Holocaust denial completely overshadow the government's repression.
        During a 90-minute September meeting with council members in New York, for example, participants said they could only recall a single question put to Mr. Ahmadinejad about limited elections and shuttering the opposition press.
        He was not pressed on rising unemployment, nor on the violent suppression of striking bus drivers protesting low wages, nor on arresting bloggers and confiscating satellite dishes to stifle debate, nor about censoring classical literature. Nobody asked about rioting by beleaguered Iranian earthquake survivors who resented giving money to Hezbollah supporters in Lebanon to rebuild houses destroyed by Israel. Mr. Ahmadinejad could have written the questions himself, the Iranian analysts argued.
        Myriad voices in the United States suggest hitting Iran hard. ''We must bomb Iran,'' began an op-ed article in The Los Angeles Times last month by Joshua Muravchik, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, arguing that diplomacy was ineffective.
        But Iranian analysts interviewed in America mostly view a military strike as the surest means to cement the regime in power. Some question the wisdom of negotiating now, arguing that the West has so demonized Mr. Ahmadinejad and Iran as threats to peace that the Islamic Republic will believe in its own superpower ratings and not feel pressed to make concessions. ''It is very optimistic to believe that in this situation any real negotiations can take place,'' said Mehdi Khaliji, a visiting fellow at The Washington Institute.
        With Iran, the United States needs to become both more confrontational in private, and less bellicose publicly, he said. For example, rather than threatening regime change and not doing much to back it up, he said, the American military should have come down hard on Iranian interference in Iraq while sounding more diplomatic in public. That approach would make Iran more amenable to compromise, he said.
        Azar Nafisi, the author of ''Reading Lolita in Tehran,'' quoted a former colleague in Tehran who compared dealing with the Islamic Republic to playing chess with a monkey. ''In the middle of the game, the monkey picks up your queen and swallows it,'' she said. ''Then what are you going to do? You are dealing with a country that is not going to follow your rules.''
        For the United States, Europe and especially Israel, the most troubling issue is Iran's nuclear program. Tehran will probably not be persuaded to stop its efforts to enrich uranium, but, the Iranian analysts say, before it develops bomb-making capability, some years of wiggle room remain to champion those within Iran who oppose nuclear weapons.
        As for Iraq, Americans and Iranians now share various interests, said Reza Aslan, an Iranian-American academic and author of ''No God but God: The Origins, Evolution and Future of Islam.''
        Iran has been far more supportive of Iraq's democratically elected government -- not least because it is controlled by Shiite Muslims -- than neighboring Sunni Arab states, he and other analysts note.
        Moreover, these experts say, Iran abhors the prospect of Iraq imploding. It wants neither an extremist Sunni rump state near its borders, nor a Kurdish one that might seed unrest amid its own Kurdish minority. And it fears that a civil war would drive millions of poor Shiites into Iran. Finally, it wants the American soldiers to go home.
        ''In the end America can pack up and go home, but Iran is stuck there and they will have to deal with any instability and chaos for decades to come,'' Mr. Aslan said.
        Aside from talking to Iran to seek common ground on Iraq, the United States could do two other things to help hobble the radical impulses within the Islamic Republic, the analysts say.
        First, they suggest making a greater distinction between individual Iranians and their government. They cite the treatment of about 120 prominent Iranian academics who tried to enter the United States last summer to attend a reunion of alumni from Sharif Industrial University, Iran's most prestigious scientific university. They all had valid visas, but American border agents, alarmed by a sudden rise in Iranian arrivals, deported about half of them.
        Second, Mr. Ganji said, Washington could concentrate on settling the Israeli-Palestinian dispute, which he said is fodder for religious extremism. As long as that rages, he said, Iran's rulers will try to exploit it to distract people from their domestic mess.
        ''We say that the Jews have the right to live, they have the right to a democratic state, but the same rights must be afforded to the Palestinians,'' he said. ''If the U.S. wants to promote democracy in this region, if it wants to fight fundamentalism and terrorism in the region, it must find a just solution to the question of Palestine.''
        THE regime survives by fostering a crisis atmosphere, he said, but would be hard pressed to create one from a peace deal that most Palestinians accept.
        Die-hards like Mr. Ahmadinejad are bound to continue to provoke the United States since anti-Americanism was a cornerstone of the 1979 revolution. But the Iranian analysts say that the best way to deflate such a position is to focus undiluted attention on what the regime has done for its people lately.
        ''When Mr. Ahmadinejad makes these points we should remind him that he has no right to say anything because look at your system -- this is a system where stoning is still legal,'' Ms. Nafisi said. ''All the talk is about Mr. Ahmadinejad, he's become the George Clooney of the political world. I think he's having the best time of his life.''
        THE WORLD
      