
        In a blow to the former commercial empire of the ousted prime minister of Thailand, Thaksin Shinawatra, the country's Supreme Administrative Court on Wednesday upheld a decision against a local broadcaster, iTV, that appeared likely to force it to close.
        The court rejected the final appeal by iTV of a lower court ruling that ordered it to increase the annual fee it pays the government and left it liable for as much as 94 billion baht ($2.7 billion) in fines.
        ''It's really just the end of the road for these guys,'' said Ramiz Chelat, a regional media analyst at Macquarie Securities in Hong Kong. ''It will put them out of business.''
        Stock in the broadcaster dropped 25 percent Wednesday.
        A spokeswoman for the company said that it would seek to negotiate a lower fine. ''We don't have that kind of money,'' she said.
        The majority owner of iTV is the Shin Corporation, the telecommunications conglomerate that made Mr. Thaksin a billionaire. His critics contend he continued to favor Shin with policies after becoming prime minister in 2001 and transferring control of the company to his children.
        His family's $1.9 billion, tax-free sale early this year of its controlling stake in Shin to the investment arm of the Singapore government, Temasek Holdings, touched off extensive street protests against Mr. Thaksin that culminated in his ouster in September.
        Analysts said that even if iTV could persuade the government not to impose penalties, it was unlikely that it could survive the higher annual fees. Although Shin owns 53 percent of iTV, the company represents only about 1 percent of its assets. Shin is more likely to let the broadcaster go under than pay the fines on its behalf, analysts said.
        ''Shin can't be forced to pay the fine,'' said Vikas Kawatra, head of institutional sales at Kim Eng Securities in Bangkok.
        While the ruling is unlikely to have much serious financial impact on Shin or on Temasek, analysts said it ratcheted up the political pressure on the Thai government to produce results from its various investigations into that deal. Prosecutors have been accused of dragging their feet in an investigation into the legality of Singapore's purchase for fear of aggravating a diplomatic impasse with an important trading partner and raising questions over other foreign investments.
        Instead, they say, the government is focusing its efforts on tax evasion charges against the family of Mr. Thaksin.
        ''They haven't taken Temasek to task partly because it would affect foreign investment and it would affect relations generally,'' said Thitinan Pongsudhirak, director of the Institute of Security and International Studies at Chulalongkorn University in Bangkok.
        Four government departments are investigating charges that the Shinawatra family evaded taxes. Mr. Thaksin's wife and brother-in-law also have come under scrutiny for share transfers made as far back as 1997. Investigators are focusing on whether the two eldest children of Mr. Thaksin should have paid income tax when transferring their holdings from an offshore company back into Thailand to sell to Temasek. Thailand has no capital gains tax, so the Shin shares were sold to Temasek and its minority partners through the stock market.
        The chief investment officer of Temasek, Jimmy Phoon, has publicly denied that Temasek knew the sale would be tax-free. Singapore also has no capital gains tax.
        In addition to gaining control of Shin and iTV, Temasek gained control of the leading cellular operator in Thailand, a satellite company and a budget airline.
        Critics cited iTV as an example of how government policies benefited Shin and its holdings. Set up in the 1990s under one of Mr. Thaksin's predecessors, iTV was given a 30-year broadcast concession on the condition that it mainly broadcast news. After Mr. Thaksin became prime minister, the company went public, and in 2004, was allowed to pay a lower annual concession fee. In addition, it was allowed to increase its entertainment content at the expense of news.
        But in May, the central administrative court rescinded these benefits and ordered iTV to return to its mostly news format and raise its payments. The government followed the decision by demanding back payments, interest and penalties.
        ''They want to send a message that you can't abuse your power in office and just change contracts to benefit yourself,'' said Karen Ang, an analyst who follows Shin for Citigroup in Bangkok.
      