
        IF last holiday season charitably could have been described as the war-on-Christmas Christmas -- with Bill O'Reilly of Fox News declaring war on the warriors and others declaring war on him -- maybe it's not such a stretch to think of this year's prevalent yuletide theme as the war-on-Christ Christmas.
        And not just Christ by himself, of course. Also God and Allah and every other version of an omnipotent, unseen deity who inspires annual celebrations, love, obedience and occasional fanaticism among untold millions.
        At least such a theme is the message that book buyers seem to be sending. ''The God Delusion,'' a jeremiad against religious belief by Richard Dawkins, a British evolutionary biologist at Oxford, reached No. 4 on the New York Times best-seller list recently and sits at No. 6 today, a week before Christmas. ''Letter to a Christian Nation,'' another spirited defense of atheism, by its American standard-bearer, Sam Harris, reached No. 6 in October. He wrote a previous best seller, ''The End of Faith: Religion, Terror and the Future of Reason.''
        In the current issue of the New Republic, the critic James Wood delves into both books and lays out his personal development as a nonbeliever, beginning at 15 and including the requisite reading of Bertrand Russell's ''Why I Am Not a Christian'' -- a revelation, he writes, ''like seeing someone in the nude, for the first time.''
        With all this high-profile atheism in mind, it might come as something of a surprise to learn what sort of tree Mr. Harris has sitting in his living room right now. Let's just say that it is not a ficus, that it tapers to a little peak practically begging for a star and that it is currently sporting some lovely ornaments on its branches.
        In a recent phone interview, Mr. Harris explained that as a ''full-time infidel'' these days, with book-tour and speaking duties, he didn't have time to pick out his Christmas tree personally. And it was really not his idea but a result ''of a lost tug of war with my wife,'' who likes Christmas trappings and insisted on buying it. But he added that his reluctance ''was good-natured all the while.''
        In other words, he is a having a (relatively) holly, jolly atheistic Christmas, one that will include presents and a big family party. And Mr. Harris, who was raised by a Jewish mother and a Quaker father, sees no glaring contradiction in doing so, at least not one he feels the need to spend much time thinking about.
        ''It seems to me to be obvious that everything we value in Christmas -- giving gifts, celebrating the holiday with our families, enjoying all of the kitsch that comes along with it -- all of that has been entirely appropriated by the secular world,'' he said, ''in the same way that Thanksgiving and Halloween have been.''
        Mr. Dawkins, reached by e-mail somewhere on a book tour, was asked about his own Christmas philosophy. The response sounded almost as if he and Mr. Harris -- and maybe other members of a soon-to-be-chartered Atheists Who Kind of Don't Object to Christmas Club -- had hashed out a statement of principles. Strangely, these principles find much common ground with Christians who complain about the holiday's over-commercialization and secularization, though the atheists bemoan the former and appreciate the latter.
        ''Presumably your reason for asking me is that 'The God Delusion' is an atheistic book, and you still think of Christmas as a religious festival,'' Mr. Dawkins wrote, in a reply printed here in its entirety. ''But of course it has long since ceased to be a religious festival. I participate for family reasons, with a reluctance that owes more to aesthetics than atheistics. I detest Jingle Bells, White Christmas, Rudolph the Red Nosed Reindeer, and the obscene spending bonanza that nowadays seems to occupy not just December, but November and much of October, too.''
        He added: ''So divorced has Christmas become from religion that I find no necessity to bother with euphemisms such as happy holiday season. In the same way as many of my friends call themselves Jewish atheists, I acknowledge that I come from Christian cultural roots. I am a post-Christian atheist. So, understanding full well that the phrase retains zero religious significance, I unhesitatingly wish everyone a Merry Christmas.''
        Such obliging feelings toward Christmas will undoubtedly serve as another piece of evidence for those like Mr. O'Reilly and conservative Christians who feel that the holiday has been hijacked -- so much so that even atheists are now comfortable getting into the spirit. But to listen to Mr. Harris and other nonbelieving Christmas celebrators, you sometimes get the feeling that their accommodation stems from the fact that Christmas -- no matter how religious it still is or is not -- has become such a juggernaut that it is simply impossible to ignore entirely. So why not grin, bear it and have yourself a double eggnog?
        Even hardliners like David Silverman, the national spokesman for American Atheists, the group founded by Madalyn Murray O'Hair, find it difficult. Many of Mr. Silverman's fellow atheists celebrate the Winter Solstice, which occurs Thursday at 7:22 p.m. Eastern Time, or HumanLight, a humanist event created in 2001 by a group of New Jersey residents and observed this coming Saturday. But not Mr. Silverman, who feels that any such doings around Christmastime are suspect. ''There's such a Christian flavor to it,'' he said of the season, ''that it's just not to my taste.''
        But he added that, as with his mother's Passover, some seasonal participation is just too hard to avoid.
        Besides, he admitted, ''I do like to go to the parties.''
        Mr. Harris does, too. As for the tree, he wanted to assure his nonbelieving friends that it was a miniature: ''This is a tree that even an atheist would be comfortable with.''
        The Grinch Delusion
      