
        ''Messiah'' performances are resounding in the city's concert halls and churches this month, but few, if any, of the choruses singing them can match the Oratorio Society of New York for venerability. The society gave its first ''Messiah'' on Christmas, 1874, during its second season, and it has performed the work every year since. Given the way Baroque performance practice has changed since then, it would have been fascinating if the choir had adhered to a consistent tradition, passed along from generation to generation, so that the ''Messiah'' it sang at Carnegie Hall on Monday evening resembled the 1874 performance.
        That would have meant a trimmed edition, with selections dropped but with a touched-up orchestration. No doubt the performance would involve entirely different conceptions of tempos, choral and solo vocal sound than is typical now. And oddly, given the current idea that late-19th-century choral performances were extravaganzas, the society, back then, used a smaller choir: it had 100 singers; now it has 200.
        Still, for all we hear about classical music being a museum culture, it isn't very good at preserving performance styles over long periods. Instead, performers push interpretation in whatever directions they (or the musicologists they trust) see fit, and later generations then try to reconstruct past styles as research projects, long after the practitioners are gone.
        That said, the Oratorio Society's vision of this great Handel work has retained several hallmarks over the last 15 years, even though its longtime director, Lyndon Woodside, who died in 2005, has been succeeded by Kent Tritle, a choral director who has never lacked for ideas of his own. As Mr. Woodside did, Mr. Tritle melds elements of the Baroque revival style honed by period instrument groups since the 1960s, with the grandeur and solidity of earlier decades.
        Mr. Tritle also shares Mr. Woodside's fondness for fast tempos, sharp accenting and transparent textures, which together put the words in high relief. And the sense of drama and pure choral heft that has always yielded thrilling performances of the climactic ''Worthy is the lamb'' and the closing ''Amen'' remains intact.
        Of the soloists Sasha Cooke, a mezzo-soprano, added the most inventive and at times daring ornamentation to her arias, although Julianne Baird, the soprano, came close. Both sang with an appealing clarity. Scott Murphree, a tenor, brought an inventive, improvisatory sense to his work as well, although timbre often seemed too light for the work. Philip Cutlip's baritone was on the light side as well, but he gave superb accounts of ''Why do the nations'' and ''The trumpet shall sound.''
        MUSIC REVIEW
      