
        President Bush on Monday began an Iraq war listening tour that will last much of this week, as he and his war cabinet work urgently toward a new strategy he can present to the public before Christmas.
        The internal administration debate is focusing acutely on whether -- and how -- the United States should press the Iraqi prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, to take more aggressive steps to crack down on militias, among other issues, following a specified timeline.
        That course was among those recommended last week by the bipartisan Iraq Study Group, which called on the United States to link continued political and military support for Mr. Maliki's government to benchmarks it would have to meet.
        The administration has been generally opposed to putting overt pressure on Mr. Maliki, but on Monday Tony Snow, the White House spokesman, left open the possibility that the United States would seek a way to get Mr. Maliki's government to achieve stability faster and get American troops home.
        ''There are going to be the best efforts to succeed as quickly as possible,'' Mr. Snow said. ''The president has made it clear to Iraqis and to the United States that we want to have this succeed, and we want it to succeed as quickly as possible.''
        Mr. Snow refused to say whether the president remained firmly opposed to establishing timetables for American withdrawal -- which would presumably coincide with Iraqis' reaching certain benchmarks in securing the country. However, he indicated during his regular afternoon briefing with reporters that the president would address the issue during an expected speech laying out his plan. He later said he had meant to imply only that the president was open to various options.
        The White House said Mr. Bush used meetings on Monday at the State Department with Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice in the morning and in the Oval Office with a group of military and Iraq policy experts in the afternoon to review political and military options in Iraq as he attempts to chart what he has called ''a new way forward.''
        As the administration grapples with how to reconcile sparring Sunni and Shiite factions in Iraq, Mr. Bush is to meet Tuesday with the Iraqi vice president, Tariq al-Hashemi, the leader of the most powerful Sunni Arab party in Iraq. That meeting is to follow a video teleconference between Mr. Bush and several American commanders, the departing secretary of defense, Donald H. Rumsfeld, and Zalmay Khalilzad, the American ambassador to Iraq.
        Aides said that through this week's meetings Mr. Bush was ''approaching the conclusion'' of his deliberations. But officials said the semipublic nature of the meetings -- which were put on Mr. Bush's schedule last week -- were also in part intended to show that he is urgently working on a solution to the worsening instability of Iraq at a time of heavy public pressure to show progress there.
        That pressure has mounted from the incoming Democratic-led Congress, from some Republicans, and from the Iraq Study Group, whose report last week prescribed 79 recommendations to help reverse what it called a ''grave and deteriorating'' situation in Iraq.
        A poll released by CBS News on Monday showed Mr. Bush had his lowest approval rating ever on the war, with just 21 percent of those surveyed saying they approve of his handling of Iraq.
        But after a weekend in which members of the neoconservative wing of his party blasted the report for proposing what they considered to be veiled retreat, and in which administration officials described some suggestions as unrealistic and impractical, the White House said the report did not play a large role in Monday's discussions.
        Asked if the report came up at the State Department meeting, Mr. Snow said, ''not really.'' And, he said, he did not expect the panel of experts to discuss it much during the Oval Office session either, saying they were not going to the White House to present ''a book review.''
        In another indication that the White House is distancing itself from the report, four of the five experts at the Oval Office -- retired four-star generals Barry McCaffrey and Jack Keane, and Eliot A. Cohen of Johns Hopkins University and Stephen Biddle of the Council on Foreign Relations -- have already publicly questioned the practicality of certain suggestions by the study group.
        Still, the administration's discussions center on many of the same issues the study group addressed. A senior official has said that among the most complicated questions facing the president is how to get Mr. Maliki, a Shiite, to move more aggressively against Shiite militias -- including the one led by one of his most powerful patrons, Moktada al-Sadr -- and to provide basic services more quickly.
        The report has suggested threatening Mr. Maliki and his government with a loss of United States support should the prime minister fail to meet a set of milestones. That would differ from the president's fundamental resistance to bringing United States troops home before the Iraqi government can ''sustain, govern and defend'' itself.
        Officials investigated reports from Baghdad that some of Mr. Maliki's fellow Shiites were plotting to push him from office and said that they were false.
        And, after his meeting with Ms. Rice -- which Vice President Dick Cheney attended as well -- Mr. Bush said they had discussed the roles Iraq's neighbors could play in stabilizing Iraq, which is a central suggestion of the study group's report. But Mr. Bush continued to make it clear he did not believe Syria or Iran would play such roles.
        ''We believe that most of the countries understand that a mainstream society, a society that is a functioning democracy, is in their interests,'' Mr. Bush said.
      