
        When Gov. George E. Pataki called lawmakers back to Albany this week to consider legislation to keep sex offenders confined even after their prison terms end, it was technically called an ''extraordinary session of the Legislature.''
        But the session, which will almost certainly be the last of the Pataki era, proved very ordinary after all, by Albany standards. There were secret negotiations behind closed doors, attempts to link the civil confinement issue to everything from charter schools to pay raises for lawmakers, and, when talks fizzled, furious political recriminations.
        In a sign of just how strained relations have grown over 12 years between the oft-discussed ''three men in a room'' who control state government -- Governor Pataki, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver and State Senator Joseph L. Bruno, the Republican majority leader -- the three men never even got into a room together this week. Instead, they spoke by phone.
        Perhaps the fact that nothing got done in the end was none too surprising, given that, to mix ornithological metaphors, it was the swan song of a lame-duck governor. But the way it unfolded was illustrative as the final episode of a show that has run 12 seasons.
        One last time, the Democratic-led Assembly held out, objecting to proposals favored by a Republican governor and a Republican-led Senate. And one last time, the enmity between Mr. Pataki and Mr. Silver reached the boiling point.
        Because the failed negotiations were all conducted in secret, it was difficult to say with certainty why the proposed deals all fell apart. But all three men were only too happy to offer their theories in Thursday's post-mortems -- and to get in a few last licks at one another.
        Governor Pataki claimed that Mr. Silver had held up the civil confinement bill because he wanted regular automatic raises for lawmakers, and charged that Mr. Silver would be responsible if any sexual offenders get released from prison and harm people.
        ''For every month this is not the law of this state, there could be another 3, 4, 10, 12, more than a dozen violent sexual predators who are released into our neighborhoods to prey on children, to prey on women, thanks to the political failure of Sheldon Silver to allow a vote in the State Assembly,'' the governor said.
        When he was asked if this would be his last negotiation with Mr. Silver, the governor said, ''I hope so.''
        Mr. Silver denied that he had ever spoken with the governor about pay raises, and noted that the governor is still trying to keep sex offenders confined past their sentences using laws that are already on the books, so it is most unlikely that anyone will be set free.
        In Mr. Silver's telling, it was the governor who had been inflexible. He claimed that Mr. Pataki had been pushing all along for a $1 billion early retirement package that Mr. Silver characterized as a ''golden parachute'' for members of the Pataki administration. He added that with top Pataki aides already departing in droves, it was ''kind of like 'Who's on First?' '' figuring out whom to negotiate with for the session.
        Mr. Silver said the governor had miscalculated if he had thought that the Assembly would agree to anything in order to get the pay raise many legislators wanted. He said that the Democratic lawmakers told him, ''Do not allow the governor to extort us.''
        And Mr. Silver made clear that he is counting the days until the governor leaves. ''In 17 days we'll have an extreme makeover in this state,'' he said. ''I look forward to it.''
        Mr. Bruno, for his part, accused Mr. Silver of ''just playing a game,'' and delaying action until Eliot Spitzer is sworn in as governor, in an attempt to hand his new Democratic ally an early victory. Mr. Bruno retaliated by blocking the confirmation of two judges favored by Mr. Silver -- a move that Mr. Silver called ''personal and petty.''
        The specter of Mr. Spitzer did hang over the final session. Mr. Silver said Mr. Spitzer would be more likely to address the concerns of the Assembly next year, and predicted that a civil confinement law and a charter school law would pass then.
        But Mr. Spitzer said he would entertain a pay raise for lawmakers only if they agreed to pass a series of government reforms. ''I oppose a pay raise, unless and until we have fundamental reform in an array of areas, including ethics, lobbying, elections, campaign finance and budget reform,'' he said in a statement Wednesday night.
        In remarks to a meeting with Democrats in Midtown Manhattan, Governor-elect Spitzer said that things would soon be different. ''After 12 long, vapid years,'' he said, ''we are ready once again to bring government back to the people of the state of New York.''
        NEWS ANALYSIS
      