
        The call for early elections by Mahmoud Abbas, the moderate Palestinian Authority president, is part of a Western-backed effort to revive the Middle East peace process in hopes of driving the radical Hamas party, which favors Israel's destruction, out of power.
        But Mr. Abbas today is a weak reed, with little power to carry out his decrees or his will. Two years after he was elected president, after the death of Yasir Arafat, opinion polls show that Mr. Abbas is perceived by a majority of Palestinians as a great disappointment, having brought little reform to his Fatah movement or improvement to their lives, while appearing to carry water for Israel and the United States.
        Mr. Abbas made a great drama on Saturday of announcing these early elections, but they seem unlikely to happen. Hamas has promised to boycott and disrupt new legislative elections, seeing them as an attempted coup. So even if there were some form of voting, a Hamas boycott would make it hollow.
        It may therefore be too late for Mr. Abbas and Fatah to be bolstered very effectively, even by a new American and British aid effort of the kind Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, here to support Mr. Abbas on Monday, seemed to foretell. Mr. Abbas is standing on shaky constitutional principles. It seems clear that he has no legal right to dissolve parliament without its consent. Not that constitutional principles are so holy here, but Mr. Abbas also lacks the power to carry out what he has decreed.
        At the same time, Hamas would welcome the resignation of Mr. Abbas, which would mean an early presidential election, letting the movement try to defeat him and take full control over the Palestinian Authority.
        ''He's declared elections, but we all know that to implement them won't be easy,'' said Khaled Duzdar, a Palestinian political analyst. ''Without Hamas's acceptance they won't happen.''
        Mr. Abbas did not declare a state of emergency in the Palestinian territories because he could not put one in place, Mr. Duzdar said. ''It's now too late to take real actions against Hamas, but he doesn't seem to understand that,'' he said. ''At least his call for elections will put pressure on Hamas to negotiate again on a unity government.''
        Palestinians, with a deep aversion to civil war while they believe the real opponent is Israel's occupation, have the same hope -- that Hamas and Fatah will come to some political agreement and form a unity government, based roughly on a reconciliation document already negotiated, that would allow their lives to continue in some safety and even to improve.
        Mouin Rabbani, a senior analyst with the International Crisis Group, an independent research group on foreign policy, argues against supporting one Palestinian faction against another. He says that progress will be possible based only on political consensus, even if the West doesn't love the result.
        ''Palestinians will remain unable to take significant decisions, or implement them, unless they're based on a broad consensus that includes at least Fatah and Hamas,'' he said. ''The international community may have preferences, but this practice of trying to make progress on the basis of divisions in the Palestinian national movement has backfired spectacularly.''
        Yet even Mr. Abbas's own, relatively moderate formula for a final peace settlement with Israel is by all accounts unacceptable to this Israeli government, as it was to the previous one. On Monday, Mr. Abbas called again on Prime Minister Ehud Olmert of Israel to enter peace talks with him. Mr. Olmert says he respects Mr. Abbas and will meet with him, but he does not think peace talks now would be productive.
        So Mr. Abbas's other main responsibility and path to credibility, as chief peace negotiator with Israel, has also proved to be hollow. Progress on even smaller matters of coexistence has been blocked since June by the capture of an Israeli soldier, Cpl. Gilad Shalit, by Hamas.
        Mr. Olmert has insisted that he will not have a substantive meeting with Mr. Abbas, and release hundreds of Palestinian prisoners to him, until Corporal Shalit is released.
        But by doing so, Mr. Olmert has given Hamas a veto over any progress between Israel and the Palestinians, further undermining Mr. Abbas's standing. Why should Hamas and its allies Iran and Syria, who have no interest in Israeli-Palestinian peace or in helping Mr. Abbas, let Corporal Shalit go?
        Eventually, they probably will. And when they choose to do so, in return for Palestinian prisoners, it will be to suit Hamas's interests. Hamas will use it to try to prove, once again, that Israel responds only to Palestinian ''resistance,'' not to the kind of nonviolence and patient negotiation that the stubborn Mr. Abbas counsels so forlornly.
        NEWS ANALYSIS
      