
        When Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. proposed a strategic economic dialogue with China last summer, American officials were cheered by the choice for leader of the Chinese team: an aggressive troubleshooter with a reputation for tough but successful trade negotiations since the early 1990s.
        But in the last few months, American officials and specialists on China have said that Wu Yi, a vice prime minister and the country's highest-ranking female official, might not have the inclination, or the influence, to challenge the party apparatus that is tied to the sprawling state-owned export industries.
        China appears to view the dialogue less as a vehicle for adjusting its policies than as a means to air its opinion that the United States should alter its economy to end an addiction to Chinese goods and loans that sustain gigantic American trade and budget deficits.
        ''I'm not expecting any miracles,'' said Yu Yongding, director of the Institute of World Economics and Politics at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences in Beijing.
        ''This visit by Mr. Paulson will have some influence on Chinese political leaders, but China always prefers gradualism,'' he said.
        Mr. Yu, an Oxford-trained economist whose institute will be the location for a major speech on Friday by Ben S. Bernanke, the Federal Reserve chairman, said Ms. Wu was not seen in China as especially sympathetic to the main American demand in the talks -- that China stop manipulating its currency in order to expand exports.
        ''I have been arguing for a change in economic policy for years, but my voice is quite lonely,'' Mr. Yu said. He added that however understanding Ms. Wu might be, she and the Communist Party are largely beholden to China's export sector, which accounts for more than a third of the country's economy.
        The United States wants China to let its currency, the yuan, float in relation to the dollar. Most economists say this would cause it to rise in value, raising the cost of exports for American consumers and reducing the cost of imports into China. Congressional leaders and business executives say currency reform should be Mr. Paulson's priority.
        The American argument is that it is in China's interest for it to channel its surplus of investment capital not into export industries, but into improving the lives of Chinese citizens and promoting a service- and consumer-led economy that does not use as much energy to run and does not further degrade the environment.
        But a transition to that kind of economy could take years, maybe decades. Moreover, some economists argue that the fixation on the dollar-yuan relationship is a distraction from larger problems like the low savings rate in the United States and low consumption in China.
        In the meantime, the Chinese fear that letting the yuan float upwards could weaken China's export-driven economy. The textile industry alone supports 90 million workers but makes minuscule profit, Mr. Yu said, so a drop in sales could force millions out of work or require more subsidies to keep them employed.
        Mr. Paulson arrived here Wednesday with Commerce Secretary Carlos M. Gutierrez; Labor Secretary Elaine L. Chao; Health and Human Services Secretary Michael O. Leavitt; Energy Secretary Samuel W. Bodman; Susan C. Schwab, the United States trade representative; and Stephen L. Johnson, head of the Environmental Protection Agency.
        The meeting of the American and Chinese teams began Thursday morning in a cavernous room in the Great Hall of the People, where the two sides were arrayed in tiers on opposite sides of the room.
        Ms. Wu's opening remarks, according to a text provided by the Chinese government, declared that ''some American friends'' had ''much misunderstanding about the reality in China." She then offered a lengthy discussion of China's history going back 5,000 years and focusing on its maintaining a ''socialist market economy system'' with state-owned enterprises as a ''mainstay.''
        Aside from general promises to continue opening China's economy to outside investment and market forces and to protect the intellectual property rights of American makers of videos, software and other goods, there were no pledges to take further actions the United States wants.
        There were also no references to currency policies, except to say that China would ''bring into better play the basic role of the market'' in allocating resources. ''Reform and opening up are the most distinct characteristics of contemporary China,'' she declared.
        Mr. Paulson, in shorter opening remarks, also repeated familiar themes, declaring that China and the United States were responsible for half the world's recent economic growth and must produce ''tangible results'' from the dialogue started this week.
        For China, he said, that meant opening markets further, promoting domestic consumption and allowing currency values to fluctuate according to market forces.
        But although Congress is calling for quick action, Mr. Paulson said he understood that various reforms should be enacted ''over the next several years,'' suggesting that there were no quick fixes.
        ''As you know, there is resistance in both our countries to greater integration into the global economy,'' Mr. Paulson said. ''and there is also skepticism that this dialogue will accomplish anything of substance.'' He said he had ''no doubt'' that positive results could come out of the talks.
        Before Thursday's session, the two sides announced several trade deals, including sales of General Electric aircraft engines and fire trucks from the Oshkosh Truck Corporation, as well as the sale of a small Chinese retail chain to Home Depot.
        The goal is to discuss a range of issues as a way of coaxing the Chinese to move on America's economic priorities. Besides their demands on currency manipulation, American officials would like China to open its economy further to foreign investment and services and crack down on piracy of videos, software, pharmaceuticals and other items.
        A senior Bush administration official who knows Ms. Wu said it was not clear how much influence she would have in overcoming the problems, even though she had a record of advocating some modernization to make the Chinese economy less dependent on exports.
        ''She's an impressive interlocutor, very direct and very capable of getting things done,'' said the official, who said he could be more candid if not quoted by name. ''I don't think that's the concern. The concern will be frankly whether she and the other forces for change continue down the path of reform.''
        Ms. Wu, 66, short in stature and with a no-nonsense and occasionally blunt manner, is known even by the Chinese as the ''iron lady'' of bureaucratic politics. She toiled in her early years as an engineer in the petroleum industry and served as vice mayor of Beijing, tirelessly advocating foreign investment to create jobs.
        She has been described for years as a ''rising star'' in the Communist Party, though she is due to retire next year. In past negotiations, such as the bargaining over China's entry into the World Trade Organization in 2000, she was seen more as an operations manager than a policy maker.
        Ms. Wu's predicted retirement parallels Mr. Paulson's expected tenure. He himself has only two more years in office. Yet both sides say their dialogue will take many years to yield results, producing a natural wariness of concessions upfront.
        The Chinese figure most likely to make the decisions on what reforms are possible is Prime Minister Wen Jiabao, to whom Ms. Wu reports. But Mr. Wen, who is in charge of foreign policy, is considered a cautious consensus-builder with an aversion to anything that could make China unstable.
        Ms. Wu is further handicapped, political experts say, by the sidelining of a top member of the Politburo, Huang Ju, who has been associated with past banking and currency reforms. Mr. Huang has been kept out of the talks by illness and his association with corruption scandals in Shanghai, where he was party chief.
        As a result of all these problems, American officials have for months tried to lower expectations. They also proclaim their interest in listening to China's agenda, though it will be at least as difficult for the United States to deliver what China wants as it is for China to meet the American agenda.
        For example, China wants the United States to raise its own savings rate and cut its budget deficit and reliance on consumer borrowing, which are blamed for the influx of Chinese goods and capital. Mr. Paulson cannot easily deliver on that even if he has a compliant Congress, which he will not.
        The Beijing government also charges that it could shift the trade imbalance and import more American goods if the Bush administration relaxed tight controls on high technology exports with sensitive military applications. The Bush administration has rejected that request.
        China also wants the United States to lift barriers to banks getting licenses in the United States and appears to be freezing efforts by American banks to set up offices in China in retaliation. But the Federal Reserve has effectively barred Chinese banks, claiming they have failed to meet Western standards on transparency.
        Finally, China would like to sell some of its estimated $700 billion in dollar-denominated reserves, earned after years of trade surpluses, and acquire American corporate assets.
        Most of all, China is hoping that this week's dialogue will enable it to educate Americans about China's economic problems, easing the pressure on it to act. But this desire comes just as the Bush administration says it needs Chinese action to ward off protectionist measures aimed at China in Congress.
      