
        WHEN Karoline Schwartz, a freshman at Mount Holyoke College, came home for Thanksgiving she wasn't exactly a stranger. ''She came home for Yom Kippur,'' said her father, Steve, a television producer. ''And then she came home a week or two later; they had the midsemester fall break. For all this money I'm spending they should be in class all the time. I think they have a whole month off between Christmas and the end of January.''
        That doesn't count parents weekend, when Karoline's mother and father visited her in South Hadley, Mass. Or Karoline's daily, sometimes hourly, exchange of text messages with her father. ''Hi, where are you?'' Mr. Schwartz tapped into his BlackBerry, showing off just how routine contact with his teenager has become. ''In class. Where are you?' '' Karoline said in a message 30 seconds later.
        Mr. Schwartz said, ''When I was in college, you'd call home once a week on Sunday night. Now it's like they're in the next room.''
        The empty nest isn't what it used to be or what many parents expected it would be when they left their children at college, driving away while trying to stifle their sobs. With religious and national holidays, family celebrations and the October break, many college students -- or at least those within several hours of their old bedrooms -- seem to be home almost as much as they're away.
        Now many of them are returning for the holidays, with some having a vacation of a month or more before classes resume.
        While much has been made of helicopter parents -- those who continue to hover over their children's lives even when they're in college -- many parents are happy to hear from their children only occasionally, taking it as a sign that they have succeeded in raising healthy adults. But with instant technology, second or third family cars, discount airfares and a college schedule that sometimes seems more Swiss sanitarium than cutthroat Ivy League, parents never know when a child might return.
        Mr. Schwartz, for example, learned that Karoline was home from college on a recent Saturday morning only when he went outside to pick up the newspaper and found her car in their driveway in Ardsley, N.Y.
        ''She felt she had so much work to do she couldn't do it in her dorm room,'' Mr. Schwartz said.
        Many summer sleep-away camps offer a longer stretch away from home than most college calendars. And many summer camps forbid cellphones. Colleges don't.
        As Nora Ephron put it in ''I Feel Bad About My Neck'': ''You wait for the melancholy. But before it strikes -- before it even has time to strike -- a shocking thing happens: Your child comes right back.''
        The result is that parents have to become acclimated to a whole new paradigm of child rearing -- or rather the same old one, which they were under the mistaken impression had ended on the first day of freshman week.
        ''It was emptier when they went to boarding school,'' said Suzy Kunhardt of Chappaqua, N.Y., who has four children, two still in college. She speaks to three of the four every day. So does her husband, Peter, a documentary filmmaker.
        ''If you want to be literal,'' she said, ''empty nest means they actually fly away and never come back. These kids never flew away.''
        When they are not visiting, they are calling. At college campuses these days, most students are on their cellphones while on their way to classes. In many cases, they're on the phone with their parents.
        In a 2005 study of students at Middlebury College in Vermont, Barbara Hofer, a psychology professor, found that the undergraduates communicated with their mothers and fathers an average of 10.41 times a week. Professor Hofer said what surprised her was that the children initiated almost as many of these contacts as their parents did. She also discovered that, despite the conventional wisdom that girls remain more attached to home than boys, boys called as often as girls.
        ''We thought students would find some of this unwanted,'' Professor Hofer said. ''But the students are not unhappy with the amount of contact they have with their parents in most cases. There's considerable mutuality.''
        Administrators said they have noticed the phenomenon. ''We have a significant number of students, particularly first-year students and some seniors, who go home,'' said Dr. Valerie Swain-Cade McCoullum, the vice provost for university life at the University of Pennsylvania. And when they're not visiting, they're taking advantage of technology, she said. ''Our students seem, almost throughout the entire day, in constant touch with family members and friends.''
        Lori-Anne Ashwood, Karoline Schwartz's student adviser at Mount Holyoke, said the dorms empty out on weekends -- and not just because the students at the women's college are seeking male social contacts. ''People who either have roommates or noisy neighbors will probably go home,'' she said. ''It's a better environment than going to the library.''
        One change is the October break. It was first introduced around 1970 to ease campus unrest during the Vietnam War and give students time for pre-election political activity, said Cass Cliatt, a spokeswoman for Princeton. Over the next decade or so, it evolved into a mini-vacation on most campuses, ''to give everybody a breather,'' an administrator at Cornell said.
        It should not be confused with ''reading period,'' several days of study time that come later and which students sometimes use to fortify themselves for their final exams with their parents' home cooking.
        Last weekend, Nazlee Navabi, a junior at the University of Pennsylvania, flew home to Phoenix to nurse a cold while she prepared for finals. She said she told her mother she would love to go home to study ''while my mom made soup and took care of me.'' Thirty-five minutes later, her mother found her an affordable ticket, and Ms. Navabi was on her way to the airport. ''I'll go back Thursday and have my first exam Friday,'' she said.
        While parents are flattered that their children like them enough to stay in touch, even in constant touch, some have reservations about the way their children involve them in the minutiae of their lives.
        ''You went to school and were in your life,'' said Sara Pasternak, a psychologist in Manhattan with two children in college, of her college experience. ''With all this communication you're living a virtual college life too much of the time -- lots of details about the courses and the professors and how they're doing in each subject. I don't think I ever discussed what I was taking with my parents. And they were involved parents.''
        Ms. Pasternak's daughter, Mimi Levine, a junior at Yale, returned to her Manhattan home frequently as a freshman, drawn back both by the excitement of the city where she grew up and the simple pleasure she took in being part of a strong, supportive family. ''If my mother said, 'We just saw these friends we haven't seen for a while,' my reaction was, 'I want to see them too! I want to be back in that world of familiarity.' ''
        All the trips home mean that many parents may not have as much free time as they were anticipating. But neither do they suffer the loneliness or those twinges of sadness and loss they believed would be their lot when their children left for college.
        Mr. Schwartz said that Karoline's surprise visit caused him and his wife to cancel their errands for the day, but he did so without regret. ''On the one hand, it's nice not to have to rush home to make dinner,'' he said. ''On the otherhand, it's quiet and empty.''
        Dr. Daphne Hsu, a pediatric cardiologist in Manhattan, said her son Bobby Rosen, a freshman at the University of California, Berkeley, is too far away to visit often. And she resists the temptation to talk to him more than once a week. ''I think the frequency of contact between kids and parents is sometimes a sign of a painful inability to separate,'' she said.
        Nonetheless, the family has bridged the miles with iChat, the Apple video conferencing program she uses to communicate with her son -- and any friends who happen to be hanging out in his dorm room. ''They're walking in and out and waving to you,'' Dr. Hsu said. ''We can see his hair is growing.''
        Some experts aren't convinced that all this contact is good for a young adult's psychological development. ''I think it's nice in a relentlessly competitive capitalistic culture we carve out more family time,'' said Michael Thompson, a psychologist and an author of ''The Pressured Child'' (Ballantine, 2004). ''But it disrupts the commitment to college. It keeps pulling you back. It can have a regressive effect.''
        Ms. Levine said all of those trips back to Manhattan affected her relationships as a freshman at Yale. ''I hadn't yet developed a close circle of friends because I went home so much,'' she said. ''It wasn't quite every weekend. But weekends in a college setting are crucial moments.''
        Still, some college students regard their real-time relationships with their parents as a good thing -- even proof of their independence and personal growth.
        ''Students at Middlebury and elsewhere actually really enjoy talking to and miss their parents,'' Samantha Pack, a sophomore, said in an e-mail message. And it's not just because they are homesick, she said, but rather ''that being in college allows them to reflect on their experiences growing up and makes them see their parents for the first time as equals, rather than overbearing, disciplinarian caregivers who constantly nag them or 'cramp their style.' ''
        Dr. Emily Jackness, a pediatric cardiologist in Brooklyn, has talked to her daughter Sarah Grover, 21, a senior at Brown, four or five times a day for the last four years. Her younger daughter, Jennifer Grover, 18, a freshman at Brown, also checks in, starting at 8:50 a.m. ''I know she's heading for her nine o'clock class,'' Dr. Jackness said. ''Her most common time to call me is if she's walking somewhere alone at night. I protect her.''
        A few minutes later, her phone rang. It was Jennifer. ''She called just to talk,'' Dr. Jackness said. ''She was perfectly happy.''
        As for Dr. Jackness, she admits that she sometimes wonders whether her daughters are too attached. But she has adjusted to their frequent visits home and daily phone calls. In fact, she only notices when they don't call. ''But I assume it's because they're having fun or studying,'' she said.
      