
        The message was scribbled on scratch paper, rhymed as a rap song and found inside the pocket of a man arrested and charged with the murder of two undercover detectives.
        ''I won't stop,'' the lyrics said, ''until I'm dead.''
        Their author, Ronell Wilson, 24, heard his boast recited aloud in Federal District Court in Brooklyn yesterday as his trial came to a close. In choosing to emphasize that excerpt, prosecutors sent an unmistakable signal to the jury, which is set to begin deliberating today on Mr. Wilson's fate.
        Should these jurors convict him of killing the detectives, they will return in the new year for a separate trial on whether to impose the death penalty. Defense lawyers also structured their closing argument with the punishment phase in mind, suggesting that an accomplice pulled the trigger.
        That argument has little bearing on guilt for the top charge against Mr. Wilson, murder in aid of racketeering, but it could weigh heavily on the minds of jurors considering capital punishment.
        Prosecutors describe Mr. Wilson as a member of the Stapleton crew, a violent drug gang on Staten Island that sold a handgun to an undercover detective, James V. Nemorin, in March 2003. Under the guise of selling a second gun, the crew planned to rob him, prosecutors say.
        But Detective Nemorin arrived after dark on March 10, 2003, to buy the second weapon, a 9-millimeter pistol, accompanied by a partner, Rodney J. Andrews. The crew members were surprised and displeased.
        As audio surveillance recordings documented, the detectives drove around northeastern Staten Island, using profane street language and successfully evading a backup team in an effort to preserve their cover as Mr. Wilson grew increasingly suspicious.
        Whether Mr. Wilson ever deduced the detectives' identities is unclear and legally irrelevant to the case. But sometime during a 14-minute span between the end of the surveillance recording and the first 911 call from a witness reporting trouble, each detective was shot once in the back of the head.
        Three and a half years later, seven members of the crew have pleaded guilty to various crimes, some agreeing to testify against Mr. Wilson in exchange for letters to sentencing judges. For three weeks, the jury has heard testimony from confessed accomplices, investigators, eyewitnesses and scientific experts, including four experts who testified for the defense.
        As the lawyers made their closing arguments yesterday, Mr. Wilson sat quietly with downcast eyes, a fist to his left cheek. The quiet courtroom was filled with spectators, including the families of the detectives and Mr. Wilson. More law officers watched on screens in a conference room and a cafeteria.
        ''Pleading for his life, begging to live, knowing that he would never see his family again, knowing that this could be the end,'' said a federal prosecutor, Morris J. Fodeman. ''That, ladies and gentlemen, is how Detective James Nemorin spent the last moments of his life.''
        ''As the blood gushed from his partner's head, Detective Nemorin felt the barrel of a gun pressed to the back of his head,'' Mr. Fodeman continued. ''This ruthless murderer was not going to let him out of that car alive.''
        Mr. Fodeman stood at a lectern, gripping its edges, his back arched slightly forward. He pointed at the murder weapon, and he spoke in a crisp, booming voice.
        ''He took this gun, put his hand on this trigger, and pulled, sending a bullet spiraling into his brain,'' he said. ''Taking from these two men, these two heroes, everything they were and everything they would ever be.''
        ''Because he wanted his cut of $1,200,'' Mr. Fodeman said, ''and he wanted to impress his criminal friends.''
        He spoke for nearly three hours, emphasizing personal responsibility and leading jurors through a minute-by-minute timeline. He underscored his arguments with sarcasm, using the phrases ''lo and behold,'' ''isn't that interesting?'' ''come on,'' and ''get this.''
        He recounted scientific testimony to corroborate the accounts of two cooperating witnesses, including Jessie Jacobus, 20, the fourth man in the car the night of the killings. He recited Mr. Wilson's rap lyrics, portraying them as a confession. And he showed before-and-after pictures of a haircut Mr. Wilson received between the time of the killings and his arrest two days later. ''This,'' Mr. Fodeman said, ''is what's called consciousness of guilt.''
        When he was done, a defense lawyer turned his attention to Mr. Jacobus, who had spent two days on the witness stand. The lawyer, Ephraim Savitt, said he had reviewed transcripts to count the number of times Mr. Jacobus had evaded his questions.
        The tally came to 70 failures of memory and 138 responses of ''I don't understand the question,'' by Mr. Savitt's count.
        ''That man is lying under oath,'' said Mr. Savitt, pacing back and forth before the jury. ''He's perjuring himself, and he's covering up his own crimes.''
        The scientific evidence showed only that both detectives were shot in the back of the head, Mr. Savitt said, not who pulled the trigger. He argued that Mr. Jacobus, in his account of Detective Nemorin's pleading for his life, failed to mention that the detective had reached for the gun pointed at his head. That oversight, Mr. Savitt argued, contradicted an important piece of crime scene evidence, gunshot residue found on the detective's hand.
        ''What forensics shows is that Detective Nemorin, in his last moments as a heroic undercover police officer, was trying to grab the gun,'' Mr. Savitt said. ''That's not corroboration at all.''
      