
        After three and a half years of preparation, lawyers for a man who faces the death penalty on charges of killing two undercover detectives presented their entire case in three hours yesterday, not counting a lunch break.
        The three defense lawyers called four witnesses, including one who had already testified for the prosecution. Tightly restricted by the court, they presented no evidence to soften the prosecution's portrayal of violent rap lyrics found in the pocket of the defendant, Ronell Wilson, 24.
        ''Your honor,'' said Ephraim Savitt, lead trial counsel for Mr. Wilson, ''the defense rests.''
        Their brief presentation sharply contrasted with the display the government concluded on Wednesday. Over two and a half weeks, three federal prosecutors portrayed Mr. Wilson as an exceedingly violent member of a drug and weapons outfit that terrorized Staten Island for years. On March 10, 2003, prosecutors contend, he shot Detectives James V. Nemorin and Rodney J. Andrews in the back of the head as they tried to buy a gun from the group.
        Using surveillance recordings, photographs and laboratory results alongside testimony from accomplices, investigators, a civilian eyewitness and crime-scene experts, prosecutors sought to place Mr. Wilson in the back seat of a car behind the detectives and beside an accomplice, Jessie Jacobus, 20.
        The prosecutors also presented the rap lyrics, which use Mr. Wilson's street name and describe shooting people in the back of the head, as evidence of a confession written after the crime.
        While cross-examining a handwriting expert, defense lawyers elicited testimony that the lyrics could have been written before the shooting, but Judge Nicholas G. Garaufis prevented them from calling an expert they said would testify that ''rap music lyrics are often based on imagination and fantasy, rather than reality.''
        On Tuesday, Judge Garaufis asked Mr. Savitt, ''How many times has this rap expert testified in court, as to rap?''
        ''Zero,'' Mr. Savitt said.
        Judge Garaufis excluded the witness, Yasser Arafat Payne, a scholar in the Black American Studies Program at the University of Delaware, on grounds that defense lawyers had failed to present his qualifications in time. He strongly rebuked their preparation.
        ''It is impossible to believe,'' the judge wrote, ''that Wilson's lawyers did not consider before Dec. 8, 2006, three and a half years after Wilson's arraignment, that the government would seek to introduce into evidence handwritten rap lyrics found in Wilson's pocket.''
        But the judge added that such testimony seemed unprecedented and inappropriate anyway.
        ''If Wilson wishes to argue that the lyrics are impressionistic and therefore carry little weight, he may do so,'' the judge wrote, adding that the expert would essentially function as a ''13th juror.''
        After his ruling, the defense team scrambled yesterday to present context to the jurors, who are overwhelmingly white and middle-aged, not the prime demographic for marketers of rap music. The lawyers discussed calling a young rap music fan, expert status aside, to present violent popular rap lyrics and discuss their meaning. That never happened.
        Instead, the defense lawyers focused their presentation on Mr. Jacobus, who has pleaded guilty to murder for his role and who testified in exchange for a letter to a sentencing judge.
        The defense lawyers called a footprint analyst for the Police Department, Robert Schmidt, to testify that he had found a bloody toe print matching Mr. Jacobus's Timberland boots on the floorboard of the rear driver's side of the car, where prosecutors say the gunman sat.
        They called a detective to testify about searching an accomplice's apartment. They re-called a police carpet fiber analyst to expound on her previous cross-examination. And they called a pathologist to testify that the gunman could have leaned over from the passenger side, where prosecutors had placed Mr. Jacobus, to fire shots matching the bullet trajectories.
        Judge Garaufis scheduled closing arguments for Monday, setting a pace for a few days of deliberations before the Christmas break. If they convict Mr. Wilson, the same jurors will return after the holidays to decide on the death penalty.
        ''Thank you for your attention,'' Judge Garaufis said. ''All rise for the jury.''
      