
        Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld bade farewell to the Pentagon on Friday with a combative valedictory speech in which he warned against hoping for ''graceful exits'' from Iraq and said it would be wrong to regard the lack of new attacks on American soil as a sign that the nation is safe from terrorism.
        ''Today, it should be clear that not only is weakness provocative,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said, standing at a lectern with President Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney at his side, ''but the perception of weakness on our part can be provocative as well.''
        It was a clear parting shot at those considering a withdrawal from war that would define his legacy and perhaps that of the president.
        ''A conclusion by our enemies that the United States lacks the will or the resolve to carry out missions that demand sacrifice and demand patience is every bit as dangerous as an imbalance of conventional military power,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said in a buoyant but sometimes emotional speech.
        Mr. Rumsfeld resigned in November after an election in which Democrats won control of Congress by promising to force change in Iraq. His successor, Robert M. Gates, takes over on Monday.
        Mr. Rumsfeld spoke after receiving full honors on the Pentagon grounds on his last day of work there. The ceremonies began with a 19-gun salute before he walked the grounds to inspect the representatives from all the service branches gathered in formation and in full dress.
        Present in the crowd were some of the former administration hawks with whom he planned the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq: Paul D. Wolfowitz, his former deputy, and Douglas J. Feith, his under secretary for defense policy. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, his frequent rival in Mr. Bush's cabinet, did not attend.
        The ceremony brought to a close perhaps the most controversial tenure for a secretary of defense since that of Robert McNamara, whose record tenure in the job bested Mr. Rumsfeld's by a mere 10 days. Like Mr. McNamara, Mr. Rumsfeld leaves a war he helped conceive in the hands of others.
        And like Mr. McNamara, his record is likely to be dissected and debated for years after his resignation.
        Yet for all of its pomp, there was little talk at the ceremony about Mr. Rumsfeld's famously combative style or the controversies he tended to provoke.
        In opening remarks, Gen. Peter Pace, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, did refer indirectly to the Abu Ghraib torture scandal, which Mr. Rumsfeld has called the low mark of his tenure. But General Pace did so in complimenting Mr. Rumsfeld for ultimately taking the blame for prisoner abuses for which the general placed blame on others down the chain of command.
        Mr. Cheney's declaration that ''Don Rumsfeld is the finest secretary of defense the nation has ever had,'' was more in keeping with the tone of the event.
        With Mr. Rumsfeld's resignation -- forced by Mr. Bush as he seeks a new approach in Iraq -- Mr. Cheney is losing one of his closest allies in the administration.
        Mr. Rumsfeld hired Mr. Cheney to work in the Ford administration. Both men served as White House chief of staff, in the House of Representatives and as secretary of defense. (Mr. Rumsfeld has been secretary of defense twice, the first time for President Ford.)
        And their shared post-Sept. 11 conviction that the United States must use strength as a deterrent and pre-emptively strike at those who plan to attack the nation has remained unbowed in the face of setbacks in Iraq.
        ''In this hour of transition every member of our military, and every person at the Pentagon, can be certain that America will stay on the offensive,'' Mr. Cheney said. ''We will stay in the fight until this threat is defeated and our children and grandchildren can live in a safer world.''
        Mr. Rumsfeld leaves the Pentagon having overseen two wars, an attack on the Pentagon itself and what he called a ''transformation'' in the use of force. That involved a switch to smaller fighting units that he said would be nimbler and more effective than larger ones favored in the past -- an approach that saw early success in Afghanistan but has faced a more severe test in Iraq.
        Mr. Bush was known to have appreciated Mr. Rumsfeld's efforts, even as calls for the defense secretary's resignation grew louder, and he indicated as much on Friday. ''There has been more profound change at the Department of Defense over the past six years than at any time since the department's creation in the late 1940s,'' Mr. Bush said. ''These changes were not easy, but because of Don Rumsfeld's determination and leadership, America has the best equipped, the best trained, and most experienced armed forces in the history of the world.''
        Mr. Rumsfeld had the last words of the day, using them to warn against backing down in Iraq. ''This is a time of great consequence,'' he said. ''It may well be comforting to some to consider graceful exits from the agonies and, indeed, the ugliness of combat. But the enemy thinks differently.''
      