
        IF the residential real estate market were a competitive sport, the two contenders in the 2006 Big Game would be the Suburban Single-Family Home team versus the Urban Village Condominiums.
        This year, the sideline report on the contest might go something like this: At this point in the season, the Suburbans seem to have lost the edge. They look a little lackluster now against the big-city crew, which has shown surprising resilience during a tough summer and fall. The Urbans are muscling ahead, and their fan base is building, as more and more seem to enjoy a metropolitan style of play.
        All right, blow a whistle on the analogy. Still, a number of developers and home builders seem to think there is not enough demand in New Jersey these days for both suburban and urban markets to prosper, and most are betting on city living.
        For example, Joyce D. Skarka of the Lennar Corporation said, ''Desire for the urban product continues to come up very impressive for us right now.''
        Benjamin D. Jagodnik of Toll Brothers, a company once best known for its McMansions, said his City Living division ''is really hitting it with our projects.'' He added, ''They are hot, hot, hot.''
        Executives from other major home building companies active in New Jersey like Tarragon Properties, K. Hovnanian Homes and the Pinnacle Companies also talked of urban projects as strong performers despite a general market malaise.
        Ms. Skarka is a vice president at Lennar Urban Northeast, a division of the national company that is a partner in developing Port Imperial, a $2.1 billion mixed-use project spanning nearly two miles on the Hudson waterfront in Weehawken, West New York and Guttenberg, all a short ferry ride from Manhattan. Lennar is also completing two projects in the Morristown town center and starting one in downtown Atlantic City.
        ''The suburban market is still moving along'' in New Jersey, Ms. Skarka said, despite the severely slowed sales pace and falling prices of the last six months. People are still buying single-family homes, she said, ''but as a company, we've been focusing on our urban division for a while now because that's where things are going really well,'' and home values are holding up better, too.
        At Port Imperial, Lennar and its partner, the Roseland Property Company, converted a rental building to add 344 condos to the mix this year, and most have been sold. Construction also began on 158 new condos: 94 tower residences and 64 four-level town homes. More than half sold before the framing was finished.
        ''We have done detailed research with focus groups at Port Imperial to see what lifestyle people are looking for,'' Ms. Skarka said. ''We found that cities are drawing them like a magnet. People don't want to feel isolated. They want the ability to interact, and to have city lifestyle amenities.''
        Next year, work will begin on the Artesian at Port Imperial, designed as a sleek all-glass structure to house 196 high-end condo units. Lennar will also start building Reflections in Atlantic City, a six-story building with 179 ''ultraluxurious'' condos featuring balconies overlooking the ocean, but those units are most likely to be second homes, Ms. Skarka said.
        She also said there was a long waiting list for two smaller projects opening now in downtown Morristown: one that created 36 condominiums in the former Vail Mansion, and another featuring nine town homes.
        This fall, K. Hovnanian Homes, which for decades specialized in building suburban subdivisions, made national news by announcing it had a 33 percent rate of cancellations of preconstruction sales contracts, a record high for the company. At the same time, its executives talked of ''excelling'' in its multifamily urban development projects.
        The same basic situation has played out for Toll Brothers: a sharply higher rate of cancellations, but a relatively vital sales pace in resurgent cities.
        The City Living division of Toll Brothers, established four years ago, has three major projects in Hoboken and Jersey City now opening for occupancy or for sales.
        The first tenants are moving into the first tower of Maxwell Place, a high-end condo complex on the waterfront in Hoboken, built in partnership with Pinnacle; it sold out quickly more than a year ago. Sales have begun on the second tower.
        In addition, sales opened recently for 116 loft units in another Hoboken structure, long known as the ''skeleton building'' -- it was vacant and made of white brick -- and within a few days, there were signed contracts for a third of the units in the building, which is to be called Harborside Lofts, Mr. Jagodnik said.
        At 700 Grove, a huge new amenity-laden complex going up near a train station in Jersey City, the sales pace may not be quite that spectacular, he said, but continues to be very strong.
        Bill Friedman, chief executive of Tarragon in New York, said he thought sales in Hoboken, in particular, were being stoked by the fact that ''virtually no quality rental units are available in that city.'' The Sovereign, perhaps the last large rental building that can rise on Hoboken's built-up waterfront, opened six months ago, Mr. Friedman noted, and it is fully leased.
        On Hoboken's west side, Tarragon is developing the Upper Grand complex, which will encompass 1,160 condos and 240 rental units in nine buildings covering eight blocks.
        ''The lack of rental units is provoking people who might otherwise have waited to buy to move ahead with purchases,'' Mr. Friedman said.
        He said he also thought that slow sales of single-family suburban homes might be beginning to sap the strength of the condo market.
        For example, in Edgewater, where Tarragon is opening One Hudson Park, a glass condo tower, sales have been slower than expected. Young professionals are signing contracts in the numbers expected, Mr. Friedman said, but not empty-nesters.
        ''The empty-nesters have to sell the houses they have,'' he said, ''and they're having trouble doing that.''
        In the Region | New Jersey
        Correction:  December 24, 2006, Sunday  The ''In the Region'' article in New Jersey and Manhattan copies last Sunday about the strength of the urban residential market in New Jersey misspelled the surname of an executive at the City Living division of Toll Brothers, which is opening three projects in Hoboken and Jersey City. He is Benjamin D. Jogodnik, not Jagodnik.
      