
        SIX FRIGATES
        The Epic History of the
        Founding of the U.S. Navy.
        By Ian W. Toll.
        Illustrated. 560 pp. W. W. Norton & Company.
        $27.95.
        By the early 19th century, dueling had been shunned and ridiculed by Enlightenment thinkers as a vestige of feudalism. But in the United States Navy, dueling -- with pistols or swords, usually over a trivial insult -- was still popular among young officers. Between 1798 and 1848, when it was finally banned, 36 officers were killed in 82 duels. About half those deaths occurred before 1815. ''The junior naval officer, done up in his high standing collar and gold lace, was as testy and vain as a fighting gamecock,'' Ian W. Toll writes in ''Six Frigates,'' his superb history of the founding of America's Navy. ''He prayed for war as a farmer would pray for rain and a lawyer would pray for lawsuits.'' For a midshipman -- a ''young gentleman'' -- denied the chance to test his honor before enemy fire, a colleague's pistol shot would have to do.
        This first book by Toll, a former financial analyst and political speechwriter, is a fluent, intelligent history of American military policy from the early 1790s, when Congress commissioned six frigates to fight the Barbary pirates, through the War of 1812. But the book's real value, and the pleasures it provides, lies in Toll's grasp of the human dimension of his subject, often obscured in the dry tomes of naval historians. The battle depictions are worthy of Patrick O'Brian (whose fictional hero, Jack Aubrey, he cleverly uses to illustrate a scene in the December 1812 shootout between the American frigate Constitution and the British frigate Java).
        Toll's real life heroes were brave, sometimes too brave. With their dandyish manners and oversensitivity to any slight, they were obsessed with face and pride. The dueling young lieutenants in their gaudy gold braid weirdly resemble modern-day gangbangers, draped with bling and bristling at any ''diss''; while the ship captains gallantly, almost gaily, sailing to their doom against more powerful warships seem, in some essential ways, no different from kamikaze pilots in World War II -- or Islamic jihadists who value a glorious death above all earthly rewards.
        Toll has plumbed diaries, letters and ships' logs to give the reader a feel for the human quirks and harsh demands of life at sea in the Age of Sail. He reports on the fantastic and unhealthy superstitions of some sailors -- that ''it was dangerous to bathe because the water might wash away one's good luck; or that blood spilled into the sea would cause a storm to abate; or that a man's tattoos protected him against venereal diseases.'' He shows the almost supernatural bond between ships and men: ''Officers and seamen sensed that a ship was a living being, with a unique personality, and the facility to do evil as well as good.'' He presents a 19th-century captain who said that his ship ''can do anything but talk, and sometimes she can do even that,'' and another who ''engaged in one-sided conversations with his ship's mizzenmast, asking how much sail she would like to carry.'' Most of all, he captures the zest for action that seized, and sometimes warped, young warriors on all sides.
        Here is the story of lucky Richard Somers, the junior officer chosen above all others (and every officer in the squadron volunteered) to sail the ketch Intrepid, stuffed with explosives -- ''literally a floating powder keg'' -- into Tripoli harbor on the night of Sept. 1, 1804. Somers's orders were to blow up the ship amid the pirate flotilla that had been preying on American trade. The men on the United States cruisers sailing just outside the harbor saw and heard an enormous explosion and waited in vain for Somers and his crew to return in two small rowboats. They concluded that the Intrepid had come under attack, and that Somers had put the match to the explosives, preferring death over capture. ''What a Noble Death, & truly characteristic of that Noble Somers,'' an envious midshipman wrote to his parents. Actually, it is almost certain that the Intrepid exploded accidentally before reaching the inner harbor.
        The United States declared war on Great Britain in 1812 largely for commercial reasons. British ships were seizing American merchantmen and sailors. But pride also played a part. Toll quotes the disgusted report of Britain's first resident ambassador to the United States, Anthony Merry, after being received at the White House in 1803 by a ''slovenly'' President Thomas Jefferson, ''standing in slippers down at the heels ... in a state of negligence actually studied.'' The British ambassador, by contrast, was in full diplomatic regalia, garbed in silk and velvet, his accoutrements polished and plumed. ''Could a pair of slippers come between nations?'' Toll asks, rhetorically. The American nation was outraged in 1807 when the British warship Leopard poured cannon fire into an American frigate, the Chesapeake, deemed to be harboring British deserters. The American ship barely got off a shot before striking her flag. One of her officers, Lt. William Henry Allen, wrote his father: ''My God is it possible? My country's flag disgraced. You cannot appreciate, you cannot conceive of my feeling at this moment ... to be so mortified, humbled -- cut to the soul.''
        The Chesapeake -- to her suspicious sailors, an ''unlucky'' ship -- got her chance for glory and redemption in June 1814. Sure of its dominance at sea, the Royal Navy had been shocked in three ship-to-ship battles with the Americans. British honor cried out for revenge. Commodore Philip Broke of His Britannic Majesty's frigate Shannon sent a written challenge to Capt. James Lawrence of the Chesapeake, offering to send away all other British ships blockading Boston Harbor to engage the American warship in a duel at sea between ships of equal size and strength. The letter never reached Lawrence, but no matter. Lawrence did not hesitate for a moment to sail out and take on the British, despite the enemy ships lurking nearby -- even though he had orders to avoid an engagement if possible. ''It could have been a medieval jousting match,'' Toll writes.
        The battle was one-sided; the crack gun crews of the Shannon battered the inexperienced tars of the Chesapeake. A witness, Toll tells us, compared the combined effect of the English grape shot, canister shot and musketry to a ''pelting gale'' as it swept the Chesapeake's quarterdeck. After less than 15 minutes, the American frigate was a floating wreck, her captain mortally wounded. Yet Lawrence cried out, ''Don't give up the ship!'' The words were heroic, but as Toll shows, they were also desperate and even foolish. Lawrence repeatedly cried out, ''Don't give up the ship! Fight her till she sinks!'' and finally, ''Don't give up the ship. Blow her up!'' He wanted a seaman to strike a match and throw it into the ship's powder magazine. Toll writes, ''It was strange that these dying words, comprising an order (not obeyed) to commit mass suicide, were subsequently adopted as the Navy's unofficial motto.'' In 1814, hubris and shame were the true dogs of war. Perhaps they still are.
        Evan Thomas, an editor at Newsweek, is the author of ''John Paul Jones'' and the forthcoming ''Sea of Thunder.''
        Correction:  December 31, 2006, Sunday  A review on Dec. 17 about ''Six Frigates: The Epic History of the Founding of the U.S. Navy,'' by Ian W. Toll, misstated the date that the American frigate Chesapeake and the British Shannon met in a sea duel off Boston. It was 1813, not 1814.
      