
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Attacks in Iraq at Record Level, Pentagon Finds'' (front page, Dec. 19):
        Is it any wonder that the overwhelming majority of Iraqis want us to leave? Not only are we occupying their country, but we are also powerless to stop the violence, most of which our very presence is helping to foment.
        Beyond all that, Iraqis now have less oil, water and electricity than before we invaded.
        I am ashamed of those Americans who, while on their patriotic way to the mall, casually say Iraqis should be thankful to us for liberating them.
        While we sadly and rightly mourn our dead troops, Iraqis suffer many times more deaths daily.
        Iraq is an unqualified and complete fiasco, and when we leave, it will probably explode into a bigger one. But this will happen regardless of the point at which we depart.
        David Kuziemko  Sterling Heights, Mich.  Dec. 19, 2006
        To the Editor:
        So our new secretary of defense, Robert M. Gates, says ''we simply cannot afford to fail'' in Iraq.
        The terms ''success'' and ''failure'' are meaningless with regard to Iraq. It is high time that we stopped glorifying our Iraq endeavor as ''a war.'' It is an invasion, pure and simple, and there is no clearly discernible enemy whom we can defeat or to whom we can lose.
        We are in the midst of a mad shooting exercise, which we helped precipitate, in which many sides are aiming at one another, and we are contributing to the mayhem by killing large numbers of people, many of them innocent civilians.
        Every additional day we continue this operation, never mind a ''surge'' in the number of troops we put there, is another stain on America.
        Ralph West  Philadelphia, Dec. 19, 2006
        To the Editor:
        You quote Robert M. Gates, the new defense secretary, as saying, ''Failure in Iraq would be a calamity that would haunt our nation, impair our credibility and endanger Americans for decades to come.''
        What are the American people to infer from this remark? Is this yet another variation of the Bush mantra ''stay the course''?
        It appears at the very least that President Bush continues to manipulate events to his advantage to preserve his legacy as he perceives it. But there is a new ''course'' to be considered, and that is the will of the American people as underscored by the voters on Nov. 7 and reiterated by the Iraq Study Group.
        George W. Bush ignores these rejections of his war at his peril. Defense Secretary Gates needs to chart an exit for the United States from this already existing calamity.
        Gilda Love  Woodmere, N.Y., Dec. 19, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Four decades ago, I was special assistant to George W. Ball, an under secretary of state, as he struggled to persuade President Lyndon B. Johnson to resist demands for increasing United States troops in Vietnam.
        The same sad scene is being replayed today with all-too-familiar echoes.
        Increasing American soldiers was a formula for disaster then, and it will be now. Our troops should come home.
        Thomas Ehrlich  Palo Alto, Calif., Dec. 19, 2006
      