
        Jaromir Jagr and Brendan Shanahan were on the ice before last night's game being honored by the Rangers for passing the 600-goal milestone earlier this season. Then they found themselves on the ice together again late in the game trying to fashion another mesmerizing performance in their Hall of Fame-worthy careers.
        But between the Rangers' emotional start and spirited finish, the Islanders' Jason Blake scored three goals and the Islanders did just enough to hold on to a 4-3 victory at Madison Square Garden.
        It was not for lack of effort by Jagr and Shanahan, whom Coach Tom Renney teamed on the same line late in the game as part of the Rangers' attempt to come back from a 4-1 deficit and prevent a third consecutive loss. A game that was supposed to honor two stars instead showcased how much the Rangers lean on them.
        ''We were constantly talking about coming back and winning the game and really wanted to make it a special night,'' Shanahan said. ''Unfortunately, we ran out of time.''
        The celebration, kept secret by the team, took both players by surprise. They were presented with silver sticks and a special guest list. In addition to their families, the Rangers had brought in Mario Lemieux, Jagr's teammate in Pittsburgh, and Steve Yzerman, Shanahan's teammate in Detroit.
        ''It was really special,'' said Jagr, who beamed when Lemieux stepped onto the ice. ''Other than my parents, he was the biggest influence on me in hockey.''
        Everything was going according to storybook form when Shanahan scored a power-play goal 8 minutes 58 seconds into the game on the kind of play he has made a career of. He shook himself free at the right post, took a terrific pass from defenseman Karel Rachunek and redirected the puck past a sprawling Rick DiPietro.
        But that was where Blake began to fashion his own part of the story. Less than a minute later, he collected a turnover from Jagr in the neutral zone, skated in and fired a shot over the right shoulder of Rangers goalie Kevin Weekes.
        It squelched any momentum the Rangers might have gotten from Shanahan's goal, and it showed how Blake could benefit from the attention the Rangers were paying his center, Alexei Yashin, who recently returned from a knee injury. Blake said he sensed the Rangers backing off him because they believed he would pass to Yashin.
        ''Sometimes you need luck on your side,'' Blake said. ''Everyone knows my game. I just try to work as hard as I can. Consistency is the thing I pride myself on. Tonight, we got a couple power plays and they went in. It's fun when you can contribute.''
        Blake's second and third goals came on power plays in the second period, earned when the Rangers skated a rut to the penalty box. The first was a five-on-three advantage when Jagr was called for holding after Shanahan had already been penalized for roughing. The next came courtesy of a hooking call on Darius Kasparaitis. With 12:15 left in the second, the Islanders had a 3-1 lead.
        Yashin made the score 4-1 with a sharp angle shot over Weekes's shoulder with 7:29 left in the period.
        The Rangers were in trouble at that point, considering the weakened state of their team. Weekes was starting because a virus sickened Henrik Lundqvist yesterday afternoon. It happened so late that the Rangers were forced to fly in Al Montoya from Hartford in a helicopter to serve as Weekes's backup.
        Center Michael Nylander missed his second game because of the virus. Center Matt Cullen sat out a second game with a sprained knee, and defenseman Marek Malik was out with a groin injury.
        ''It is tough to replace them, but it is not an excuse,'' Jagr said. ''We still need to find a way to win.''
        Jagr and Shanahan did what they could. They teamed for a power-play goal with 41 seconds left in the second, when Shanahan started the play and Jagr scored on a rebound. Then, with 8:15 left in the third, Shanahan took a shot that trickled between DiPietro's pads. Jagr skated in and pushed the puck over the goal line to make the score 4-3.
        Together, though, Jagr and Shanahan could not muster the tying goal. They ended up regretting the penalties they took in the second period. But they also made a game of what could have been a desultory loss. And they did it on the same line.
        ''They were energized by it,'' Renney said. ''Clearly, they knew this game and this team were on their shoulders at that point in time. That's what makes them great players.''
        HOCKEY
      