
        Helen Utegaard died last Thursday in Las Vegas at 82. She was born in Beijing and was raised in a house that is now a historic landmark, having been used by Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai. Moving to the United States after marrying John Utegaard, a marine, she became one of the best female American bridge players never to win a world title, taking 10 North American titles and becoming a grand life master with more than 11,000 master points. She was a World Bridge Federation world master who played in six world team championships, her best finish being fifth in the 1988 Team Olympiad.
        She played courageously in the diagramed deal, which occurred during the final of the Women's Knockout Teams at the 1981 Spring Nationals in Detroit.
        At the other table North-South rested in two no-trump, going down one when declarer misguessed the play.
        In this auction Pat Lapides (North), despite a featureless six points, pushed on to three no-trump, knowing that a big bonus is paid for making a vulnerable game.
        West led the spade queen, giving Utegaard her first problem: should she duck or win the trick?
        She decided to duck, primarily hoping that the spade queen was a singleton.
        West continued with her second spade, though, declarer taking the trick.
        Things looked desperate. South decided that her best chance was that West would hold both missing club honors and that East would come under pressure in the end game. So declarer cashed her club king, then continued with the club ten, West playing low smoothly. Holding her breath, Utegaard called for a low club from the board. When she won the trick, she continued with a club to dummy's ace and another club to West's queen. East had to make two discards. She would have done best to pitch winning spades, but being unable to bring herself to do that, East threw two hearts.
        West shifted to a diamond, covered by the jack, king and ace. Declarer cashed her heart ace, dropping East's jack, and continued with a low heart to establish nine tricks: one spade, three hearts, two diamonds and three clubs.
        Plus 600 gave Utegaard's team 12 international match points on the way to victory by 19 imps. Utegaard's teammates were June Deutsch, Sandi Leavitt, Evelyn Levitt, Jo Morse and Lapides.
        In addition to the books mentioned in Saturday's column, two aimed at intermediate and advanced players would make good gifts. In ''Three Notrump in Depth'' (HNB Publishing), Augie Boehm first covers bidding to and avoiding three no-trump. Then he looks at declarer play and defense in the most popular game contract.
        ''Defend These Hands With Me'' by Julian Pottage (Master Point Press) is written in an over-the-shoulder style. The author takes the reader through 60 difficult defensive deals.
        And Jude Goodwin, who has drawn a lot of bridge cartoons, has put the best into a book, ''Go Ahead, Laugh!'' (Master Point Press).
        Bridge
      