
        MY own snow globe story is not really about a snow globe. But those stories never are.
        The snow globes we remember best are the ones that say something about our lost childhoods. Mine involved squeezing into the backseat of a Buick with three brothers to drive north to Wisconsin, where my family rented the same cabin every August. No, despite what my brothers may claim, I did not ''hog'' the ''good window'' behind my mother on the passenger's side.
        Anyway, the highlight of the drive was the pit stop we always made at the Wisconsin Dells, an area where an old-fashioned theme park called Storybook Gardens had exhibits loosely based on the rhymes from Mother Goose. To call these displays rides would be to overstate the case; my favorite was the ''Old Woman in a Shoe'' attraction, which consisted mainly of a gigantic plaster-like boot that we liked to climb on.
        No, I did not ''hog'' the ''shoelace area.''
        One year, my parents bought me a souvenir from Storybook Gardens, a boot-shaped snow globe that I shook and shook and shook the rest of the way to the lake, equally charmed by the fake snowflakes swirling around and by the jealousy my trinket provoked in my brothers.
        Yes, I refused to let them shake it.
        That was a good family vacation. But it was only decades later -- one day last week, in fact -- that I suddenly felt a sudden ache of nostalgia for my long-lost snow globe.
        Snow globes, like other memories, sneak up on you. This is only part of their charm, of course, but it's a large part. That explains why the tiny, shakable universes have claimed a hold on their owners' affections since the 19th century, when the earliest ones were made in Europe.
        Mine was plastic, like so many of the cheap scenes of tourist destinations that dominated the market after World War II. Earlier, real glass globes had starring roles in movies like ''Citizen Kane'' (In the deathbed scene, the title character utters ''Rosebud'' while gazing at snowflakes swirling in a globe.)
        You don't see either type in stores very often anymore, but both remain widely available on the Internet. They go by different names; for sale on eBay one day last week I found 3,930 snow globes, 592 snowdomes, 87 vintage snowdomes and 895 water globes.
        They ranged from a ''Disney Bambi snowglobe'' (new in box, ''Buy It Now'' for $19.97) to a vintage ''Santa Riding Rudolph'' in snow dome (starting bid, 99 cents). On collectibles sites like Tias.com, you could see how years of evaporation have caused the liquid level to noticeably drop in some of the older snow globes, like ''Vintage Santa Claus'' ($9.28, ''There is not much water left'').
        It's even possible to buy a reproduction of the famous ''Citizen Kane'' snow globe, featuring a tiny, snowbound cottage inside a glass ball ($29.95 at Inhermajestysservice.com), reissued by Perzy, the Austrian company that made it for the 1941 film.
        On eBay, I found myself particularly drawn to one from ''Santa's Village -- Dundee, IL.'' It came from another theme park, this one involving paths lined by giant, fever-dream ''candy canes,'' where my parents used to take my brothers and me to ride in roller coaster cars shaped like Christmas tree ornaments. Santa's Village may be long gone, but last week on eBay a mere $13.99 was all that was required to immediately purchase and possess the snow globe version in perpetuity.
        Does this sound tacky? Perhaps. But the tackier, the better. Most hardcore collectors actually prefer the plastic ones that became popular in the United States after World War II.
        ''Every person has his own aesthetic,'' said Nancy McMichael, author of ''Snowdomes,'' the definitive work on the subject. ''The people who originally bought the plastic ones when they were new took them seriously and put them on their television sets when they got home from vacation. In later years, people came along and looked at them as funky and kitschy.
        ''Very different people like the new ones from the Disney company,'' she said. ''They're made to be collectibles, which means that real collectors don't collect them. There's no challenge.''
        Ms. McMichael, who once had 6,000, hunted for them in flea markets and on the back shelves of stores. She specialized in collecting little plastic ones originally sold at tourist attractions in the mid-20th century.
        ''They were very specific to the places they came from, with a plaque with the name of the place they came from and a scene that was not generic,'' she said. ''I had 25 different ones from the Statue of Liberty, with no two scenes exactly alike. But later, after the '70s, they became more generic, and now it is very hard to find a new one that is from a specific place.''
        A large number of kitschy, midcentury snow globes are for sale at Snowdomes.com, a site owned by Alan and Sharon Jones.
        The selection ranges from snow globes that were created to advertise products (like one with a little can of Spam surrounded by swirling snow, for $10.50) to souvenirs from movies. A Pink Panther model ($24.50), for instance, features the film's title character with a globe for a belly. ''You can see his ribs and an olive floating around in there,'' Mr. Jones said.
        I even stumbled across an old snow globe from Storybook Gardens. It cost $9.50. Was it the same one I had as a child? I can't remember for sure, although I will say the high-heeled boot looked very, very familiar.
        I considered buying it. I inspected the image closely. Yes, that was the same Bo Peep I remembered. (No, I did not ''shove'' my little brother when he wanted to have his picture taken, standing next to her in 1967.)
        Snowdomes.com also sells supplies for do-it-yourselfers who want to make their own snow globes (a kit of three all-clear domes, three white bases, plugs and snow costs $11.50, ''glue not included'').
        Maybe I would be better off buying the kit and making my own scene inside. Amid the swirling flakes of fake snow would be a Buick sedan, in which sat two harried parents, three little boys making horrible faces at passing cars and a girl, enjoying the view through the ''good window.''
        Online Shopper E-mail: slatalla@nytimes.com
      