
        ALBANY, N.Y. (AP) -- State Senate Majority Leader Joseph Bruno is the subject of a federal inquiry for his business interests outside of the Legislature, he said Tuesday.
        Bruno, a Rensselaer County Republican, said he was told by the FBI in late spring that he was being investigated. Bruno said he does not know what exactly investigators are looking for, but said he has been cooperating with the inquiry.
        Bruno, who became majority leader in 1994, said he came forward about the investigation after learning it had been leaked to reporters.
        "I wanted to be up front and assure that I have nothing to hide and avoid speculation, unfounded rumors, and distortions," he said.
        Paul Holstein, an FBI spokesman in Albany, declined to comment on the investigation. A call to the U.S. Attorney's office in Albany was not immediately returned.
        Outside of the Legislature, Bruno is part of Capital Business Consultants LLC, which helps clients with marketing, strategy and business development, he said. Lawmakers are allowed to have other sources of income under Legislative rules.
        "My interests outside the Legislature have all been cleared and approved by the Legislative Ethics Committee," Bruno said.
        He maintained that the investigation would not cause him to lose his position as the Legislature's most powerful Republican.
        Earlier this month it came to light that Bruno directed $500,000 in state funding in the past two fiscal years to a private company connected to a businessman being investigated for providing Bruno with free air travel, state records show.
        The Empire State Development Corp. grants to Evident Technologies Inc., a private nanotechnology company based in Bruno's district, received the "pork-barrel" spending at Bruno's request. Initial funding for Evident came from an investment firm run by Jared Abbruzzese, according to a news report posted on the company's Web site.
        Abbruzzese is currently under investigation by the state Lobbying Commission into whether he provided Bruno with an illegal gift when he flew him between New York City and Albany. The businessman was formerly on the board of Empire Racing Associates, one of several groups seeking the lucrative state franchise to operate thoroughbred racing in New York.
        Bruno will help decide which group will run racing in the state.
        In 2005, Bruno's son, Kenneth Bruno, gave up lobbying to start a private law practice about a year after he started the business. Father and son both said there was no conflict, but government watchdog groups had expressed concern over whether the younger Bruno was trading on his father's position.
      