
        The City Council yesterday approved the first major overhaul of the most popular tax break for apartment building developers, adopting a plan intended to induce them to build tens of thousands of apartments for people other than the well-heeled.
        The changes, which Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg supported and which would go into effect in 2008, significantly increase the areas of the city in which developers who want the tax break must make one out of every five apartments they build affordable to lower-income people. The boundaries of those areas would be reconsidered every two years in light of trends in the housing market.
        In addition, and for the first time in the 35-year history of the program, those lower-priced apartments would have to be included in each building and could not be built elsewhere in the city. There would be a cap on the size of the tax break given for market-rate apartments, to limit the degree to which the program might be said to subsidize gentrification.
        The revamped program would also include a $400 million trust fund for developing low- and moderately priced housing, especially in the city's 15 poorest neighborhoods, including Soundview in the Bronx and parts of Bushwick in Brooklyn.
        Housing officials estimate that the program, which is said to have fueled the construction of 110,000 units since 1971, will generate 20,000 new units of lower-priced housing over the first 10 years. The apartments, for rent or sale, will be set aside for New Yorkers making no more than 80 percent of the median household income, or $56,720 for a family of four.
        ''This is the single most important element of the largest affordable housing plan in the nation's history,'' said Shaun Donovan, commissioner of the Department of Housing Preservation and Development, referring to the mayor's plan to create or preserve 165,000 units of lower-priced housing by 2013. ''No other single change that we will make, or new policy, will have as broad an impact.''
        Christine C. Quinn, the Council speaker, who sponsored the measure, said, ''The bill will create even more affordable housing, encourage development in communities where it is still needed and protect taxpayer dollars from oversubsidizing new luxury development.''
        But Steven Spinola, president of the Real Estate Board of New York, a real estate trade association with 11,000 members, said of the bill, ''I believe it will result in less production of housing, as well as less production of affordable housing.'' He suggested that the changes would alter the economics of development in certain neighborhoods, limiting the incentive for developers to proceed with their projects there.
        The bill represented a compromise between an administration bill and a more radical proposal initially backed by as many as 20 members of the 51-member Council.
        The impact of the changes, which cannot go into effect until the State Legislature renews the program, known as 421-a, next year, is likely to be greatest in former industrial areas like the Brooklyn-Queens waterfront that seem poised for large-scale residential redevelopment. The changes will also be felt in places like downtown Brooklyn and along Fourth Avenue where recent rezoning has opened up the possibility of new building.
        The 421-a program, which costs the city hundreds of millions of dollars a year in forgone tax revenue, was begun in the 1970s to spur housing development. Under the program, developers could get a 10- to 15-year exemption from the increase in taxes that resulted from their work. In poor neighborhoods, the tax break lasted up to 25 years.
        When the real estate market in Manhattan revived in the 1980s, the program was modified to require developers in central Manhattan to build lower-cost units if they wanted the tax break. Many of those units were built outside Manhattan. The designated area of Manhattan, known as the exclusion area, was expanded in recent years to include areas along the Greenpoint-Williamsburg waterfront.
        But there has been a growing consensus in favor of broader reforms. In February, Mayor Bloomberg appointed a task force of developers, affordable housing advocates, bankers and others to look into changes. Based on the group's report, the administration in October proposed some expansion of the exclusion area, a limit on the tax benefit for market-rate apartments, a $300 million trust fund and other changes.
        Last month, more than a third of the City Council submitted a counterproposal under which no developers anywhere in the city would get the tax break without making at least 30 percent of the apartments in their buildings affordable to lower-income people. Under their plan, the low-priced units would have been required to be affordable for households earning no more than 50 percent of the median income, or $35,000 for a family of four.
        Ms. Quinn's compromise, which passed by 44 to 5, expands the exclusion area to include Manhattan south of 136th Street in West and Central Harlem and south of 117th Street in East Harlem, as well as an area between 124th and 126th Streets in East Harlem. It also covers Downtown Brooklyn, Carroll Gardens, Cobble Hill, Boerum Hill and Park Slope, as well as most of Fort Greene, Prospect Heights, Williamsburg and Greenpoint, and parts of Sunset Park and Bushwick.
        The bill limits the total tax break for market-rate apartments so that buildings with average apartment prices of more than $650,000 will receive abatements for no more than the first $650,000. The changes also limit the number of low-priced units that go to households making 60 percent to 80 percent of the median income, to ensure that most go to households making less than that.
        Mr. Donovan, the housing commissioner, estimated that the new $400 million trust fund would produce 7,200 lower-priced units over 10 years; another 6,600 would come from $300 million in new tax revenue generated by changes in the plan. On top of that, he said, about 6,000 more units are expected to be created as a result of the increased incentives.
        Julie Miles, director of Housing Here and Now, a coalition of affordable-housing advocacy groups and others that campaigned for change, said she was now looking to the state to require even more radical reform. But she also said, ''I think this coalition of council members and housing advocates standing together had a real impact on long overdue reform of the 421-a program.''
        Correction:  December 22, 2006, Friday  A map with a front-page article yesterday, about a measure passed by the New York City Council that overhauls a tax break for housing developers, omitted a narrow section of Queens along the East River that will become part of a zone in which developers will be required to include some lower-cost housing to get tax breaks. A corrected version is at nytimes.com/region.
      