
        Rudolph W. Giuliani chose a senior Republican Party official to head his presidential exploratory committee on Wednesday, sending an unmistakable message about how serious he is in exploring a 2008 run.
        The official, Mike DuHaime, the political director of the Republican National Committee, is likely to serve as campaign manager should Mr. Giuliani decide to seek the Republican presidential nomination.
        Mr. Giuliani's choice of Mr. DuHaime -- and Mr. DuHaime's acceptance of the offer -- appeared devised to address skepticism in Republican circles about how serious Mr. Giuliani was about a presidential bid.
        Until now, Mr. Giuliani was known to have a close and insular circle of advisers, mostly from New York. Many Republicans have expressed strong doubts that Mr. Giuliani, a former mayor of New York who supported abortion rights and gay rights, could win the nomination of a party dominated by social conservatives.
        Mr. DuHaime has extensive experience in national politics, serving both at the Republican National Committee and in President Bush's re-election campaign, where he was the Northeast regional director. Mr. DuHaime has close ties to Ken Mehlman, the Republican National Committee chairman.
        ''I don't have to tell you the credibility he has in the field,'' said Anthony Carbonetti, a longtime senior adviser to Mr. Giuliani. ''Being the R.N.C. political director, his tentacles reach out across the country.''
        The announcement was a bit of a blow to efforts by aides to Senator John McCain of Arizona to suggest that he was emerging as the anointed candidate of the White House. Until now, most of the high-level Republicans from Mr. Bush's orbit who have moved into the 2008 contest have made their way onto the McCain train.
        Mr. Mehlman, the party's national chairman, who said he was remaining neutral in the contest, described the hiring of Mr. DuHaime as a big boost for Mr. Giuliani. ''Any campaign that is fortunate enough to get Mike DuHaime, particularly in the role they are putting him in, is in my opinion one that is serious and is one that will in my opinion be rewarded,'' Mr. Mehlman said in an interview.
        Mr. Carbonetti said the announcement would be followed by more appointments of senior staff members in the next few weeks. He also said that Mr. Giuliani would begin a new wave of travel to states that will have early primaries in 2008.
        ''We are interviewing a lot of people, starting to roll some stuff out,'' he said. ''Quite honestly, we would have waited until January with DuHaime, but this might leak out, and we wanted to get in front of it.''
        As part of the stepped-up efforts, Mr. Giuliani's advisers have been reaching out to old friends and supporters, seeking donations for the first fund-raiser for Mr. Giuliani's exploratory committee next Tuesday.
        ''We really want to show Rudy that his friends and supporters are behind him in this important undertaking,'' wrote Peter Powers, a director of the exploratory committee and a former deputy mayor, in an e-mail message sent to prospective donors late last week. ''So, even if you are unable to attend this event to greet Rudy, we hope you would consider contributing to the Exploratory Committee as a sign of support for Rudy.''
        Some Republican supporters who are close to Mr. Giuliani said that they hoped to raise more than $500,000 from the fund-raiser, a $2,100-a-person event.
      