
        Telephone companies got some help yesterday in elbowing their way into the video arena that the cable industry has dominated.
        Arguing that cable television rates have surged in the absence of robust competition, federal regulators moved to speed up the local approval process for phone companies seeking to compete.
        The action came in a 3-to-2 vote by the Federal Communications Commission. The ruling does not force municipalities to grant phone companies a video franchise, but it does require a decision within 90 days.
        Phone carriers, notably Verizon, have asserted that some municipalities are slow to grant approvals, often in the face of cable industry lobbying.
        If it succeeds in fostering competition, the decision could eventually affect the rates and services available to the roughly 100 million households that pay for access to television.
        The decision is part of a fierce political, regulatory and business battle between the cable and telephone companies. They are battling town by town and household by household to get a share of the growing amount Americans spend on their monthly telecommunications bills.
        Cable companies have made considerable inroads at offering telephone service and high-speed Internet access. Telephone companies have in the last year entered cable's traditional turf, television, and say this decision will fuel their offensive.
        ''This means an end to the automatic skyrocketing in cable prices and means greater choice in service and programming,'' said David Fish, a Verizon spokesman.
        But industry analysts said that the decision would not prompt overnight change, in part because it is likely to face a court challenge, but also because the biggest challenge to the phone companies remains the technical and financial logistics of entering a costly new business.
        The F.C.C. found that municipalities were unnecessarily and unfairly delaying approval of franchise agreements, refusing them unreasonably, or making unrelated demands, like requiring financing for public swimming pools or recreation centers.
        Cable industry officials said they objected to the decision, arguing it creates an uneven playing field by not similarly expediting the process for renewal of their own franchises -- the typically multiyear agreements that allow cable companies to provide television access in a community in exchange for a tax of around 5 percent of their sales.
        The industry also rejected F.C.C. data indicating that cable television prices had risen steadily in recent years, even as competition had driven down the cost of other telecommunications services, like Internet and phone access.
        The commission found that the average monthly rate for cable service increased 5.2 percent, to $43.04, in 2004 alone, and 93 percent in less than a decade.
        Kyle McSlarrow, president and chief executive of the National Cable and Telecommunications Association, said those figures were taken from published rate cards, and thus ignored the reality that most subscribers get discounts or other deals.
        He said the prices also did not reflect the discounts offered when subscribers buy bundles of telephone, Internet and television service.
        Roughly 66 million American households pay for cable service, compared with around 28 million who get satellite access. There are only a few million who get it through telephone lines.
        Bills introduced in Congress this year would have eased the franchise approval process, either by making it national or creating a national standard, but no legislation was ultimately approved.
        There have also been political battles at the state level, with the phone companies seeking a statewide approval process that would circumvent municipal franchising. They have prevailed in states including Texas, New Jersey and California.
        Jessica Zufolo, an analyst who studies the telecommunications market on behalf of investors, called the F.C.C. decision ''a huge victory for the Bells,'' but said ''it's a somewhat pyrrhic victory because there's a high, high litigation risk.'' She said cities in particular might sue, arguing that the F.C.C. had overstepped its authority.
        Commissioner Jonathan S. Adelstein, who voted against the proposal, asserted that the agency lacked the authority to rule as it had. And Jim L. Haggerton, vice chairman of the Information Technology and Communications Committee of the National League of Cities, said the ruling took away municipalities' rightful power.
        ''We're totally opposed to the federal government making the decisions for cities across the country,'' said Mr. Haggerton, who sits on the city council in Tukwila, Wash.
        Kevin J. Martin, the commission chairman, who voted in favor of the new rule, emphasized the finding that insufficient competition was fueling a rise in cable rates.
        ''It is critical then that the commission act to remove regulatory barriers to the ability of a second cable operator to enter the market,'' he said in a statement.
        The most aggressive effort to compete against cable companies has come from Verizon. The company said it provided television service to 1.2 million customers, and had franchise agreements in about 300 municipalities including 25 in New York State, mostly on Long Island. That is a small fraction of the more than 3,000 municipalities Verizon said it needed to reach to achieve its goal of providing television service in 60 percent of its telephone territory.
        Mr. Fish of Verizon said agreements in other cities had taken many months; he said 83 percent of franchise negotiations with cities had been going on for more than a year.
        AT&T, the nation's other big phone company, is so far offering television service in two markets, Houston and San Antonio.
        Michael Balmoris, a company spokesman, said AT&T's position was that because it was delivering television service over telephone lines, it was not subject to local franchise regulation.
        But it has already encountered local skirmishes over related issues. For example, he said that ''multiple cities'' in Illinois had not allowed AT&T to upgrade its network to high-speed fiber lines on the ground that doing so would effectively permit the company to offer video service without a franchise agreement.
        ''We can use the F.C.C. item today in litigation to show we should be able to upgrade'' our lines, he said.
        Still, analysts said the chief hurdle for telephone companies would be laying lines in the ground capable of delivering television, then convincing consumers to switch.
        The F.C.C. decision ''certainly alleviates something of a challenge that Verizon and AT&T have to go through,'' said Alan Bezoza, telecommunications industry analyst with Oppenheimer & Company. ''But the biggest challenge will be just rolling this out.''
      