
        A street gang member who boasted of bloodshed and invincibility in his amateur rap lyrics was found guilty yesterday of capital murder for shooting two undercover detectives in the back of the head during a weapons sting on Staten Island.
        The convicted man, Ronell Wilson, 24, known by the street name Rated R, cocked his head to watch sidelong and deadpan as the jury foreman announced the verdict, which could lead to his death by lethal injection. The same anonymous panel will reconvene next month in Federal District Court in Brooklyn to decide whether to impose a death sentence.
        The verdict, after three and a half years of legal machinations, concluded an agonizing chapter for the Police Department. The two detectives, James V. Nemorin and Rodney J. Andrews, were killed on March 10, 2003, the first two officers killed by gunfire in a single day since 1988.
        Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly called the decision a victory for police officers and for the people of New York. ''They need to know that cop killers will be brought to justice,'' he said in a written statement, adding that he hoped the verdict would provide a measure of comfort to the detectives' families. ''We will never forget them or their sacrifice.''
        Outside the courtroom, officers who had worked alongside the two detectives whispered their relief. ''It's finally over,'' said Detective Al Hawkins, who served with both men in the firearms unit. ''I'm just happy. I guess there is a God.''
        The extended murder case bridged a passage from the aftermath of the 2001 terrorist attacks, when the nation warmly embraced the New York police, to the onset of new acrimony after several police shootings of civilians. It became a part of the debate over the state's death penalty law and was a catalyst for an ambitious weapons crackdown by the city.
        In a written statement on the verdict, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said, ''We will continue to honor their memory by doing everything possible to take illegal guns off the street and protect the safety of all New Yorkers.''
        The killings drew scrutiny to the work of undercover narcotics and firearms investigators, their mission perilous by nature and furtive by design. And by a twist of fate, the three-and-a-half-week trial of Mr. Wilson began two days after an undercover police team in Queens killed an unarmed man in a rain of 50 bullets.
        The coincidence made for uneasy parallels as such undercover terms of art as set (the area of operation) and ghost (for backup officer) were analyzed simultaneously in the Brooklyn courtroom and in protests and news conferences concerning the Queens case.
        Within the walls of the courthouse, where a lunchroom telecast of the proceedings droned daily for overflow crowds of law enforcement officers and police union officials, there was solidarity and undiminished grief. Even as Judge Nicholas G. Garaufis banished police regalia from the courtroom at the outset so as not to prejudice the jury, officers attended in plainclothes, with flag pins on their lapels.
        In the gallery, they sat grimfaced alongside the detectives' widows and kin, who lost control of their emotions at times and left for the makeshift cafeteria theater to regain their composure, with mixed success.
        Across the courtroom aisle sat supporters of Mr. Wilson, including his mother, Cheryl Wilson. Another of her sons, Leonard Wilson, is serving 25 years to life for the murder of a rival drug dealer in 1999. At the center of the trial, her younger son sat calmly and impassively, betraying neither hope nor despair.
        Family members on all sides declined to comment on the verdict, as many of them are likely to testify in the death penalty phase of the trial. In that proceeding, set to begin Jan. 10, prosecutors will offer lists of aggravating factors, and defense lawyers will offer lists of mitigating ones. In court yesterday, defense lawyers said they planned two weeks of testimony; prosecutors promised that their case would be ''brief.''
        The forum allows room for arguments on residual doubt, a kind existing beyond the reasonable, as well as on penitence, continuing danger to society, congenital disadvantage, influence of rap culture and spark of humanity in him. Mr. Wilson's lyrics will almost certainly be discussed, especially lines like ''I won't stop until I'm dead.''
        Only three men have been executed in federal prison since 1988, when the modern death penalty statute was enacted, though the states have put hundreds to death. The last federal inmate executed in a New York case was Gerhard A. Puff, a bank robber convicted of killing an F.B.I. agent and put to death in 1954.
        The New York courts invalidated the latest version of the state death penalty law in 2004 midway through a series of turns that extended the prosecution of Mr. Wilson and his co-defendants, a gang of men based around the Stapleton Houses project in northeastern Staten Island. Federal prosecutors took over the case, endorsing existing plea bargains and striking others to build a racketeering case carrying the federal death penalty.
        Seven members of the crew pleaded guilty to various crimes, including two men who testified against Mr. Wilson in exchange for letters to their sentencing judges.
        It was never proved whether Mr. Wilson knew his victims were detectives, and an accomplice's recantation eventually prompted prosecutors to drop such charges. But a witness testified that Mr. Wilson gave a reason for the shootings in the minutes after he pulled the trigger. He did not care, the witness quoted him saying, ''about anybody.''
        The prosecutors, Colleen Kavanagh, Morris J. Fodeman and Jack Smith, assisted by Special Agent Thomas Shelton of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, presented nearly three weeks of testimony and evidence from members of the crew, scientific experts, civilian eyewitnesses, investigators and audio and video surveillance recordings.
        After nine hours of deliberations over two days, the seven men and five women of the jury notified the judge of a verdict at 1 p.m. yesterday. The gallery filled with spectators, including law officers, family members, television commentators, sketch artists and the United States attorney, Roslynn R. Mauskopf.
        The lawyers packed their briefing papers and soda bottles, for something to do. Federal marshals lined the gallery in dark suits and holiday ties. The courtroom was nearly silent but for doors opening and closing.
        Mr. Wilson walked in slowly and shook hands with a lawyer, then sat and surveyed this scene. He wore dark slacks and an argyle sweater. He maintained his even demeanor.
        The judge asked for decorum, telling anyone who could not keep silent to watch from the overflow room. No one left. Mr. Wilson rocked side to side in his chair, slowly.
        ''Will the defendant please rise?'' the judge said, and Mr. Wilson lifted himself from his chair, palms on the table. The widows and sisters of the detectives clutched hands tightly and sank in their pews.
        The jury foreman stood in a black suit, eyes on the judge. One by one, he declared Mr. Wilson guilty of two counts of murder in aid of racketeering, robbery conspiracy, attempted robbery and carjacking, each one a charge punishable by death. He continued, declaring him guilty of two counts of using a firearm, two of causing death with a firearm and another of robbery conspiracy, 10 crimes in all.
        The gallery was hushed. There were many dry eyes. Mr. Wilson arched his brow for a second. His hands were clasped behind his back, and he gave a small shrug, then sat and leaned back in his padded chair. He glanced at his mother and then returned his gaze to some point far, far away.
      