
        In an effort to recruit and retain volunteers for Suffolk County's emergency services, County Executive Steve Levy has announced a program that would give priority to firefighters and ambulance workers for affordable housing the county hopes is developed.
        Under the plan, an unspecified percentage of the town houses and apartments in a proposed affordable housing development on a 250-acre site in Yaphank would be set aside for individuals who have at least five years of service as an emergency volunteer and meet income guidelines. Final plans and prices for the housing have not been determined, but Mr. Levy said the idea is to help some of the 3,000 emergency services volunteers stay in the county.
        ''Many departments have expressed difficulties in recruiting and maintaining volunteers,'' he said. ''For young people who have to work two jobs just to pay their rent, there is very little time left to volunteer. If we had to go to a paid force, our taxes would go through the roof.''
        Mr. Levy said that while zoning and land use are under the jurisdiction of individual municipalities, the county wants to encourage affordable housing by offering incentives, like providing money to help with land acquisition or speeding up sewage-treatment-facilities permits from the Health Department.
        The Suffolk County initiative is not the first of its kind on Long Island. The Village of Great Neck has proposed a 120-unit apartment complex that would include 24 units, renting at below market rate, for volunteer firefighters and emergency service workers. It has been delayed, however, because of community opposition.
        Richard E. Deem, the Great Neck mayor, said, ''It's not that the community is against housing for our volunteers, but there are concerns about aspects of the proposal,'' including traffic congestion and entrances to the development.
        Personal Information Loss Prompts Action at College
        The loss of a printed list with personal information of the 21,500 students at Nassau Community College has ignited concerns about identity theft and credit fraud and may cost the college up to $500,000.
        Reginald Tuggle, a college spokesman, said that on Nov. 28, an employee in the student activities office, who was trying to verity that the people involved in activities there were actually students, was using a computer printout with names, addresses, phone numbers, dates of birth and Social Security numbers. ''She apparently walked away from her desk for a short time,'' he said, ''and when she returned, the list was gone.''
        The Board of Trustees notified the local police, the F.B.I., the Department of Homeland Security and several major credit bureaus. It authorized $195,000 to pay for credit monitoring of students for the next year, although the bill could end up higher.
        ''Typically, when a service like this is offered, credit agencies estimate that 34 percent of students will sign up,'' Mr. Tuggle said, explaining the amount allocated by the board. ''But if every student wants credit monitoring, we will cover their costs.''
        The college immediately discontinued the use of lists with Social Security numbers or dates of birth. Letters were sent to students describing how to sign up for credit monitoring and advising them about a new state law that allows them to place a security freeze on their credit.
        State Senator Charles J. Fuschillo Jr., Republican of Merrick, was a sponsor of the measure, which went into effect Nov. 1. He said that by placing a freeze on a credit report, any access to someone's credit is blocked, but consumers can unfreeze their credit for a specific purchase. ''This is the ultimate security protection against identity theft,'' he said.
        Several other Long Island colleges said they had safeguards in place to protect the privacy of students and employees. At Hofstra and Adelphi Universities, numbers are assigned for identification purposes rather than using Social Security numbers, and Social Security numbers are not used on any student lists at Hofstra, Adelphi or at Farmingdale State College, officials at the colleges said.
        Nontoxic Cleaning Products Ordered in Nassau Buildings
        For Nassau County buildings, the new year will bring with it ''green'' cleaning products.
        County Executive Thomas R. Suozzi signed an executive order last Monday mandating that only environmentally friendly cleaning products, free of potentially harmful chemicals, be used in the county's 800 buildings. The change expands a pilot program in the County Executive Building in Mineola, where county workers have used nontoxic cleaning products for the past few months.
        Mr. Suozzi said that when the current cleaning contracts expire early next year, outside vendors will be able to use only ''green'' products. County purchasing officials will also switch to all environmentally beneficial products, he said.
        Tom Maher, the director of environmental coordination, said that green products were not only better for the environment, but also less expensive. While it is too early to estimate the cost savings, Mr. Maher said, the county spends more than $40,000 a year on cleaning supplies.
        ''Initially we were concerned whether the green products would clean as well, but the feedback has been that they clean even better,'' he said. ''So it's a win-win-win situation.''
        THE WEEK
      