
        THE heavy metal gate that Abigail Rosin pulls down at night in front of Groove With Me in East Harlem is only 30 miles from where Ms. Rosin grew up in Chappaqua, but it protects the achievement of a 10-year journey through several Manhattan locations, hundreds of grant applications and thousands of students.
        Ms. Rosin, 34, who now lives in the East Village, began dancing as a 5-year-old at the New Castle Community Center in Chappaqua, entertaining friends and family at events like the hamlet's annual Strawberry Festival. She joined the Steffi Nossen School of Dance, which had classes in Chappaqua, and as a teenager choreographed works at Horace Greeley High School and for the Chappaqua Drama Group. But a high school car accident derailed Ms. Rosin's dancing career just weeks before a large role in ''Jesus Christ Superstar,'' leaving the 18-year-old with a broken ankle and a sizable insurance settlement.
        At Brown University, her dance aspirations took a backseat to her studies in women's health care. It wasn't until Ms. Rosin focused on what do to with her postcollege life that she returned to the barre. Because of her experience working during college at a women's prison and a Fresh Air Fund camp in Fishkill, Ms. Rosin wanted to find a way to help girls stay away from drugs, jail and early motherhood.
        ''I knew their mistakes came from isolation and low self-confidence,'' she said. Dance school, she believed, would foster self-esteem and relationship-building in an environment students would like -- not because of how it would help their future, but because it was fun.
        Groove With Me, Ms. Rosin's free dance school for girls in Harlem, grew from that belief, and this year celebrated its 10th anniversary. She used the money from her car accident to support herself as she started offering dance classes at youth organizations. Today 200 students fill the second-story Groove With Me studio every week; the school has a 90 percent re-enrollment rate, and a 60-girl waiting list.
        This winter, Ms. Rosin hopes, those girls will be off the waiting list when the school, which now sits above a Family Discount store and below a hair braiding shop on Third Avenue, moves across the street to a space that is more than double its current 1,400 square feet. It will have two large studios, a changing room and a lounge for parents.
        It took a lot of work to go from an idea for a dance school to a 3,500-square-foot studio. Ms. Rosin and her program director, Meredith Sherman, have recruited 26 volunteer teachers, secured two dozen grants and raised several hundred thousand dollars in private donations. Some of the first in-kind donations were made by Chappaqua high school friends. One created the graphic design for a dance-a-thon fund-raiser, and another who worked for Ralph Lauren donated T-shirts and baseball caps that the Groove With Me girls still wear. The big fund-raiser is an annual springtime benefit, ''Tap & Tapas,'' in which the girls perform and chefs from around the city volunteer their time and resources to make small dishes for donors. The school also presents two recitals a year, and gives approximately six outside performances each semester for groups that request the dancers.
        Polly Kingsbury, Ms. Rosin's childhood dance instructor, wasn't surprised by her former student's success.
        ''She was the kind of student who would keep an eye out for other students who weren't quite getting a step or pattern or combination, and give them a hand,'' said Ms. Kingsbury, who retired after 34 years of teaching dance at Steffi Nossen Schools across Westchester.
        Ms. Rosin said she never intended for her program to be short term, but its success has been more than she expected.
        ''I would never start something that I didn't think would last,'' she said. ''But I didn't think it would grow so much and that so many people would be touched by it.''
        Chelsea Geronimo, a fifth grader at Public School 83 who takes three classes a week ( tap, hip-hop and ballet), is proof of that.
        ''She's a beautiful dancer,'' Ms. Rosin said.
        Chelsea's mother, Michelle Vierra, watched her as she practiced what Ms. Rosin calls ''an unconventional Janet Jackson ballet'' with eight other students in a Wednesday night class at Groove With Me.
        ''On a single income,'' Ms. Vierra said, ''bringing my child to ballet would have been impossible.''
        Groove With Me, 2271 Third Avenue, New York. Information: (212) 987-5910 or www.groovewithme.org. ''Tap & Tapas Benefit'' on April 16 is at Loft Eleven, 336 West 37th Street, New York. Information: (212) 987-5910.
      