
        The body of a newborn girl, still bloody and with her umbilical cord attached, was discovered about 8 a.m. yesterday laying facedown on a patch of grass outside a Bronx housing development, the police said.
        The police received an anonymous 911 call indicating that a baby was on the ground and may have been thrown from or fallen out of a window outside of the Eastchester Gardens housing complex.
        It was unclear last night what caused the baby's death, the police said. A spokeswoman for the medical examiner's office said an autopsy on the infant, who was pronounced dead at Jacobi Medical Center, was scheduled for today.
        The police yesterday were talking with a 14-year-old girl who they believe was the baby's mother.
        The girl, who lives with her family on the fifth floor of Eastchester Gardens, had been picked up by the police at school and was taken to Jacobi Medical Center for treatment, the police said. As of last night, no arrests had been made in connection with the death.
        Neighbors were distraught and angry, and some said they would have taken the baby in themselves.
        ''I've never seen nothing that hurt me so badly,'' said Nelly Rosario, 45, a neighbor who said she saw the baby in the grass and at first mistook for a doll. ''I will never, as long as I live, forget that sight. It was going to be a beautiful baby.''
        Investigators yesterday searched the apartment building, including the rooftop, and later inspected a trash can outside a nearby McDonald's on East Gun Hill Road. One officer said that clothing, which was possibly soiled with ''some afterbirth or a placenta,'' was found in the trash can.
        Yesterday morning, a woman, who neighbors said is the mother of the 14-year-old girl being questioned, was escorted by the police from her apartment. Neighbors said four additional children live in the family's apartment.
        A spokeswoman for the Administration for Children's Services said she could not comment on whether the family had any history with the agency, but said that an investigation would be conducted.
        A community affairs officer at the scene said: ''It brought me to tears when I walked into the hospital and saw her. The best word is 'heartbreaking.' It just doesn't make sense.''
      