
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Report on Iraq Exposes a Divide Within the G.O.P.'' (front page, Dec. 10):
        The Republican right does not get it. The American people spoke clearly in November: We have done our duty in Iraq.
        The false dichotomy of winning versus losing does not apply. We should start to wrap up the enterprise, not increase it, as the hawks are advocating.
        The American people also said the Iraqis should begin taking responsibility for their problems: it is their war now, not ours. Nor does the war against terrorism require our becoming Iraq's long-term military police.
        It is becoming clear that the Republican right still does not have an exit plan. Indeed, the vehemence of its reaction to the Baker-Hamilton plan exposes that it is presuming a costly and long-term engagement, which is in sheer opposition to the will of the American people.
        Christopher Wuthmann  San Carlos, Calif., Dec. 11, 2006
        To the Editor:
        David Brooks (''After the Fall,'' column, Dec. 10) invokes the domino theory to explain why the United States should remain in Iraq.
        First used to justify our intervention in Vietnam, the theory predicted that all of Southeast Asia would fall to Communist rule if we failed to intervene.
        In Iraq, policy experts invoked an optimistic version of the theory, predicting that democracy resulting from the invasion would ripple through the entire Middle East.
        After the invasion produced the complete breakdown of the Iraqi state, Mr. Brooks and others now raise the cautionary counterargument: If we leave, the entire Middle East will fall in the wake of Iraq's sectarian violence.
        The United States is no better at predicting the global consequences of its military adventures today than it was 40 years ago. Rather than relying on the domino theory to guide foreign-policy decision-making, the United States should be more mindful of the law of unintended consequences.
        Anna Kline  Frenchtown, N.J., Dec. 10, 2006
        To the Editor:
        David Brooks's vision of what the Middle East will look like over the next 30 years -- an array of ''subnational'' and ''supernational'' groups, some new and some old, increasing in strength at the expense of weakening nation-states -- may well come to pass.
        But Mr. Brooks links the beginning of this era to the hypothetical withdrawal of American forces from Iraq in the fall of 2007. Did not this very troubling period actually begin in March 2003, when President Bush heedlessly sent our military into Iraq and set this fall of dominoes into motion?
        Geoffrey Upton  New York, Dec. 10, 2006
        To the Editor:
        As Frank Rich makes clear (''The Sunshine Boys Can't Save Iraq,'' column, Dec. 10), a bipartisan study group is a creature with two heads and no spine.
        Remember, it was a bipartisan consensus after the 9/11 attacks that led us into war in Iraq -- and we forget this fact at our peril.
        What is needed now is not amity between Democrats and Republicans -- all those handshakes and smiles across the aisle -- but a vigorous and truthful debate about what the next move in Iraq might be.
        A genuine debate would be heated, contentious and fiercely partisan -- and that would be a good thing.
        Paul Elie  New York, Dec. 11, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Re ''The Time Is Now'' (column, Dec. 11):
        Bob Herbert quotes John McCain's profound insights on the war in Vietnam: ''It was a shameful thing to ask men to suffer and die, to persevere through god-awful afflictions and heartache, to endure the dehumanizing experiences that are unavoidable in combat, for a cause that the country wouldn't support over time and that our leaders so wrongly believed could be achieved at a smaller cost than our enemy was prepared to make us pay.''
        But the day before the column appeared, a front-page article noted that Senator McCain is calling for an immediate increase of troops in Iraq (''Report on Iraq Exposes a Divide Within the G.O.P.,'' Dec. 10).
        Senator McCain, a former soldier and prisoner of war, is in a far better position than most to speak on the horrors of war; that he can now urge sending even more men and women into this nightmare, with the chance of victory beyond slim, is simply unforgivable.
        Lisa Eggert Litvin  Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.  Dec. 11, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Bob Herbert is right to say that if we're going to pull our troops out of Iraq sometime, now is better than later. We all make mistakes; some we can fix, and some we just have to live with.
        We have to live with the current president; we have to live with giving that president the authority to invade Iraq. But we don't have to live with a pointless killing of our troops.
        That mistake can be fixed, and it should be fixed now.
        David Bedell  Melbourne Beach, Fla.  Dec. 11, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Richard Perle (''Democracy Defeated,'' Op-Ed, Dec. 10) writes, ''Things that start badly seldom end well.''
        Though referring to the Iraq Study Group, his statement applies to the Iraq war itself, begun with the administration's twisted facts, implausible assertions and devious media campaigns, and even to the Bush presidency, begun under indelible clouds of doubt that will forever hang over and taint the authenticity of the 2000 election.
        Alas, Mr. Perle may be right: gauged by current developments, both the Iraq war and the Bush presidency stand good chances of ending poorly.
        Russ Beebe  Franklin, Tenn., Dec. 10, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Re ''A Still-Serving Rumsfeld Is Set for Mustering Out'' (Pentagon Memo, Dec. 9):
        Donald H. Rumsfeld's long-awaited departure as defense secretary may serve to temporarily expunge our collective guilt for the debacle that is Iraq. We may even sympathize with the man for being such an obvious scapegoat of an administration unable to accept the reality of its own failures.
        Yet we must remember that it was a majority of Americans who supported the Iraq invasion, a neutered Congress that authorized it, and a feckless press that went along for the ride.
        Yes, as Americans we deserve better leadership, but we also owe greater vigilance.
        Jason Cohen  Albuquerque, Dec. 9, 2006
      