
        The idea for the movie came, in part, from a series of real-life break-ins.
        While the writer and director Anthony Minghella was filming the Civil War epic ''Cold Mountain'' on location in Romania several years ago, his studio back home in north London, in the midst of being renovated, was repeatedly burglarized -- 13 times in two months. As dismaying as that was, it got Mr. Minghella pondering an old obsession: the clash of cultures between the rich and the poor, the privileged and the disaffected, that churns beneath the surface of contemporary London.
        The result is ''Breaking and Entering,'' written and directed by Mr. Minghella and miles away from the period adaptations -- ''Cold Mountain,'' ''The English Patient'' and ''The Talented Mr. Ripley'' -- for which he has been known. The project is unusual in the sense that Hollywood these days favors dependable adaptations over riskier original scripts, but it is actually a return to form for Mr. Minghella, who also wrote the screenplay for the first film he directed, ''Truly, Madly, Deeply'' (1991).
        ''Breaking and Entering'' is to open tomorrow for a brief run in Los Angeles, which will qualify it for awards consideration, before its wider release on Jan. 26. It stars Jude Law as Will Francis, a landscape architect whose offices, like Mr. Minghella's, are in the process of being renovated by day and burglarized by night. Juliette Binoche plays Amira, a Bosnian refugee whose 15-year-old son, Miro (Rafi Gavron), is one of the thieves; Robin Wright Penn plays Liv, Will's Swedish-American wife, who hides her powerful emotions under a chilly, remote surface.
        The film depicts a different side of London to audiences used to the glittery, moneyed city of films like ''Notting Hill,'' ''Love Actually'' and ''Closer.'' The hard life of London's transient immigrant groups was explored to harrowing effect in ''Dirty Pretty Things'' (2002), Stephen Frears's film about workers in a west London hotel, but Mr. Minghella has focused more directly on how immigrants fit in, or don't, to the greater social fabric here.
        ''London is particularly interesting insofar as we have a long and distinguished history of welcoming and encouraging migration and migrant workers, and the city depends on them to exist and function,'' Mr. Minghella said in a telephone interview from New York, where he was starting a round of publicity for ''Breaking and Entering.''
        ''But while we share the geographical space, we don't share much else,'' he continued. ''We're not particularly well integrated. One of the curiosities can be the differences rather than the similarities between people walking down the street, differences in expectation and privilege, in wealth and opportunity. It's not tension or aggression, but a kind of guarded indifference. We coexist rather than create communities.''
        Mr. Minghella's father, who runs an ice cream business on the Isle of Wight, immigrated to Britain from Italy; his mother's parents were Italian immigrants. ''They had a good experience,'' he said. ''My father comes from a very poor family, and for him England's been a land of opportunity and plenty and embrace. The vantage point I had was that England was a place of welcome.''
        But not for everyone. Immigration is one of the most emotive political issues in Britain, as the country struggles with the increase in economic migrants and refugees fleeing wars, famines and genocides in Europe and Africa. The immigrants come in waves, first from one country and then from another, taking jobs as cleaners, dishwashers, odd-job men, fast-food workers, and scraping together a living on the edge of society. Most end up in or around London, where the attitude toward new arrivals ranges from wary acceptance to outright hostility.
        Often they are all but invisible to the people whose houses they clean and whose coffee they serve, said Timothy Bricknell, who produced the film along with Mr. Minghella and Sydney Pollack. ''It's a fact of life living in London that you are part of this mix of cultures and religions,'' he said in a telephone interview. ''Your taxi driver could be a Kenyan politician, and your cleaner a documentary filmmaker from Mozambique.'' And often they have endured unspeakable difficulties.
        Ms. Binoche's character, Amira, ''represents a whole wave of immigrants into the country escaping from terrible horrors,'' Mr. Bricknell said. ''Most Londoners don't pay much attention, but one undeniably good thing about Will is that he doesn't underestimate her, but accepts her on her own terms.''
        The film examines what happens when the sheltered Will becomes drawn into Amira's unfamiliar world, centered on her claustrophobic apartment in an ugly housing project. The two have an affair, and Will, somewhat ineffectually, tries to help her while at the same time negotiating myriad problems at home, not least his wife's growing distance and the severe behavioral difficulties of his teenage stepdaughter.
        Mr. Minghella deliberately set up a parallel between Will's wife and his mistress, both of whom have devoted themselves to their children, and between the respective children. But while Liv is frustratingly opaque, even chilly, Amira is passionate and outspoken. Will's struggle is in part a struggle between the two sides of his character.
        ''These are two mothers who'd made enormous sacrifices for their children, who'd put their lives on hold for their children: one full of emotion and one full of hidden emotion,'' Mr. Minghella said.
        But everything in the film loops back to the city itself, and to the rapidly changing neighborhood around King's Cross in north London, where much of the action takes place. Once one of London's seediest neighborhoods and still a late-night hangout for drug dealers and prostitutes, King's Cross is also a busy train station, the scene of an enormous redevelopment project that is supposed to transform it into a huge center of offices, business and housing, and the site of a planned Eurostar terminal linking London to Paris.
        Will's office is here, in the center of all these changes. Even as he explores the seamier side of his own life -- in addition to his affair, he becomes friends with a local prostitute -- his company is working on the redevelopment of King's Cross, a plan that will change the neighborhood forever.
        For Mr. Minghella too the film helped marry the two sides of his life, and bring his work back to contemporary Britain, as he had in ''Truly, Madly, Deeply.''
        ''Part of the equation of my professional life had turned on this notion of, 'here is life and here is film,' '' he said. ''The concept I had was that I would point a camera out the back of my house and see what was going on.''
      