
        ''WE'VE lost our power.'' Where I live, there is nothing spiritual, psychological or political about these words. They are dire, referring to a physical circumstance; they mean that a utility pole or tree has fallen somewhere, wires are down, and the house has no electricity. Tropical Storm Ernesto in September was the cause of our most recent power failure, and while it lasted a mere 13 hours, shorter, more spontaneous power failures that seem to occur in the absence of any weather-related event have become routine in our area as well.
        There is something about a house without power: it has no hum, none of the soft background noises of the furnace, pump or refrigerator, none of the chirping of the computer, phone and fax that subtly reassure you that life is going on. A silence and stillness, an invasive quiet, or maybe disquiet, settles in. And with it comes uncertainty, because when the power is to be restored is as unpredictable as when it may go. Later, sometimes much later, comes that slightly magical moment when the house springs back to life, lights on, all the appliances resuming their improvisational rondeau.
        Part of the relief of coming through a blackout lies in knowing we have just endured an excursion to some province of uncertainty. In his essay ''Self-Reliance,'' Ralph Waldo Emerson observes that ''With consistency a great soul has simply nothing to do.'' While I lay no claims for my soul, I know that a blackout is a genuine cure for consistency; routines are upended, schedules are thwarted, work remains undone. Still, we manage to manage, bearing out another of Emerson's assertions, which is that ''We thrive by casualties.'' But whether our casualty lasts for three minutes, three hours or three days, it still always raises the question of whether to get a generator. So far, we haven't.
        Not that we don't think about it. With winter upon us, I leaf through home-equipment magazines and tool catalogs and review my options with the obsessive fascination of Paris Hilton eyeing the runway during Fashion Week. Smart HomeOwner magazine assures me that power failures lasting more than 24 hours have tripled in this country since 1978, presumably on account of our ravenous energy consumption and worn-out infrastructure. And I learned from a phone call to the New York State Public Service Commission that while the frequency of power failures in the state has leveled off in the last five years, their duration has increased. The Web site for a manufacturer of generators went so far as to track the path of Hurricane Florence churning its way up the Atlantic, all but promising me a blackout in my immediate future.
        Generators fall into two categories, standby and portable, the chief difference being that the first comes on automatically within seconds of a power failure while the other needs to be switched on manually. Standbys are generally installed permanently on concrete pads outdoors, while portables are just that. (All of them, though, must be operated outside, as they produce carbon monoxide fumes.) My head is turned by a standby liquid-cooled number that runs on natural gas and has something called an ''Ultra-Quiet Whisper Test'' feature, but its price tag of close to $8,000 seems extravagant, and I know I could get by just as well with a low-rent option priced under $1,000; with a six-gallon fuel tank, it provides continuous power for 10 or 12 hours. If the power failure lasts longer, you can just refuel.
        The one I would probably settle for lies somewhere in between, a portable unit with a 16-gallon fuel tank that costs $2,000. There is something reassuring about knowing that it can generate electricity for a full 24 hours without refueling. ''There is no such thing as too much power,'' says its ad copy, underscoring its dependability. And like anyone newly infatuated, I reconsider my future, in which our old clapboard farmhouse becomes some epicenter of power and productivity.
        Yet for all the lust I try to summon up for one of these, no one I know who has a generator loves it all that much; for all the security it offers, it's a piece of equipment that seems to elicit nothing so much as ambivalence. ''It is an essential evil,'' says Anne Kreamer, a former neighbor of mine in Dutchess County who bought a generator for her house there. ''Its smell, fumes and noise are all loathsome, but I would do anything not to have my pipes freeze.'' Years earlier, she and her family had come home one frigid night after a power failure to find the interior of their house encrusted with glaciers. A generator, she says, is ''life-support for the house.'' It's not about a freezer full of rotting meat; it's for the pipes. And she made it a point never to turn on the generator during summer blackouts. ''The windows are all open, so with all the noise and fumes of the generator, it's like sleeping next to the B.Q.E.'' Instead, she would light the Coleman lanterns and just make do.
        That ambivalence makes sense to me. It is, after all, at the root of my own indecisiveness, which I know is not just about the house, but about whether owning a generator signals efficiency and resourcefulness or coddled incompetence. I also know that the purchase of a generator that offers 3,000 hours of uninterrupted power is only partly about excessive cold or heat, a refrigerator full of spoiling food, empty faucets, the darkness, the silence. What it is most about is the acknowledgment that we're on our own indefinitely. Continuity and constancy are at the core of our sense of security today, and I suspect that unexpected disruptions -- whether they are a few dropped minutes of cellphone service, the unannounced arrival of an electronic worm or a two-day power failure -- undermine it deeply.
        Which brings me back to Emerson, who urged his readers to become conversant with the unexpected. ''The world uncertain comes and goes,'' he said in a simple statement that implies gracious acceptance of that fact. I consider as well the stamina that his particular brand of thriving takes and try to imagine whether I can summon up a similar resilience. But then, I remind myself, Emerson never had the option of owning a Guardian QuietSource that promised him power. Anytime, anywhere.
        HOME WORK
      