
        IN their 10 years together, Paige and Matt Rodgers have given each other a lot of gifts. An expensive Swiss watch one holiday season, a white gold Tiffany bracelet another year. And every year each counts on the other to replenish their respective collections of pajamas and ties.
        When Ms. Rodgers found herself feeling stumped this year, an online search turned up the perfect solution: computer training for school children in Sierra Leone.
        Mr. Rodgers, a product manager for a software company, had lamented that his busy life left little time for volunteering. With a few computer clicks from the comfort of their home in Corte Madera, Calif., Ms. Rodgers made a donation in her husband's name. ''I was so excited about it,'' she said. ''I told him about his gift in advance.''
        The period between Thanksgiving and Christmas has long been a peak season for charitable organizations, as people rush to do good -- and rack up tax breaks -- by year's end. But increasingly, managers of nonprofit organizations say, people are making donations in the names of spouses, cousins, co-workers and clients, all feel-good gifts to people who want for nothing.
        Savvy marketing by charities that tie donated dollar amounts to individual causes make such gifts all the more attractive. An $18 gift can buy a can of worms for a farmer in Ecuador. For $250, a family in Thailand can receive a water buffalo. And for $4,000, an entire school in rural India can receive needed financing.
        But these gifts can be risky. For Ms. Rodgers, 36, it was a way to show her husband that she could still surprise him. And it worked. ''I have all my toys, and my closet is full,'' Mr. Rodgers, 37, said. ''This was incredibly creative and so appropriate to my interests.''
        For Jennifer Prior, Ms. Rodgers's sister, an equivalent gift from her boyfriend of four months, she said half-jokingly, might be cause for a breakup.
        ''I would only like it if it was wrapped up with something else that was nice and sparkly,'' said Ms. Prior, 38, the copy desk chief for Wired magazine. ''Part of me would respect the gift, but respect is not the same as romance, especially in a new relationship.''
        Harriette Cole, a syndicated advice columnist, said that those giving charitable gifts should exercise caution. Making a donation in another person's name puts the recipient, not the donor, on the organization's solicitation list and burdens them with responding to or rejecting future fund-raising appeals. Charitable gifts can even be offensive, if the recipient takes issue with the cause involved or the organization handling the money.
        ''It can be a very presumptuous action,'' she said. ''You have to make sure that your presumptions match a person's interests, desires and wishes.''
        Despite the risks, plenty of people are choosing to make a donation in a loved one's name as a holiday gift.
        ''In the last few years we've started to see a real crossover,'' said George C. Ruotolo Jr., chairman of the Giving Institute, an organization that assists nonprofit groups with fund-raising. ''We're seeing year-end giving in other people's names instead of just personal donations.''
        Heifer International, which provides livestock to needy families worldwide, took in $1.25 million in gift donations on Dec. 23 and 24 last year. Officials with the organization said that they expect an even higher volume this year, based on gift donations this season.
        In response to increasing demand, Oxfam America started a dedicated online gift-giving campaign this year called Oxfam America Unwrapped. Since its start in October, the site has taken in more than $400,000, the group's highest volume of holiday gift donations.
        Nothing but Nets, a new malaria-prevention program that provides mosquito nets throughout Africa, has raised more than $56,000 in gift donations since mid-November. The cost for a single net, including distribution and training costs, is $10 and the average donation so far has been roughly $60.
        Jeanne Tomcavage, who owns a personal-training fitness studio in Santa Monica, Calif., said that she did all of her holiday shopping this year through Nothing but Nets, donating well over $1,000, which she will dispense in the form of informational cards to dozens of clients, employees and friends.
        ''Every year I struggle with what to get my clients to thank them for their business, and it gets to be nonsensical,'' said Ms. Tomcavage, 40. ''I like that this money is directly linked to making a tangible difference in someone's life. This year is the first in memory where I feel really good about the money I am spending.''
        Many charities have snappy holiday marketing slogans to entice high-minded givers. ''Starting to sweat your online shopping list?'' asks one marketing pitch from Oxfam America. ''Don't get unraveled, get unwrapped! Give a camel or a crocodile to the person who has it all.''
        Ms. Rodgers bought her husband's gift through UniversalGiving.org, a Web-based nonprofit organization that links donors to charities. Ms. Rodgers was one of many who received e-mail messages and newsletters from the group enticing shoppers to ''leave the crowds behind this holiday season'' and instead consider providing safe drinking water to villagers in Vietnam, or seeds and bags for a nursery in Nicaragua.
        Organizations offer personalized gift cards with moving explanations of the lives changed by a donation. There are even charitable holiday gift registries, similar to wedding registries, so that people can direct friends and family to their favorite cause in lieu of yet another winter hat and scarf.
        Paul Newman (no, not that one), a Coast Guard boating safety specialist, and his wife, Angela, set up a holiday registry this year with Heifer International. Their registry request asks family and friends for their help in buying a ''milk menagerie'' -- one heifer, two goats and a water buffalo -- for $1,000, which they hope to raise in $100 gift shares.
        So far, the Newmans have received 15 pledges and have recorded eight actual gift sales on the Web site. ''We all spend hundreds on each other and our children,'' said Mr. Newman 54, who lives in Santa Rosa, Calif. ''This has helped our family to refocus.''
        Unexpected charitable gifts can produce awkward responses. When Jason Clampet, an editor for a travel Web site who lives in Philadelphia, opened a gift card from his sister two years ago to find a picture of a lamb, he instinctively behaved, he said, like a Homer Simpson-like oaf, fixating not on good will, but on how deliciously yummy his gift would be for Christmas dinner.
        ''All I could think about was mint and garlic and olive oil,'' said Mr. Clampet, 32. ''I felt terrible, and my family thought I was terrible, because I was there talking about menus. But it took me by surprise because it wasn't part of our gift-giving tradition.''
        For years, the adults in Margie Johnson's family have enjoyed their holiday gift swap with a strict price cap of $30. The tradition, said Ms. Johnson, who lives in Morristown, Tenn., sets everyone on the hunt for terrific deals and fun finds, like a velvet scarf marked down to $20 from $100.
        This year, when her sister Penny Rose, who lives in Black Mountain, N.C., suggested that the family pool the money they would spend on gifts for a charitable donation, Ms. Johnson and the rest of the family led a polite but determined revolt.
        ''She called us all selfish brutes, but we were not shamed, we got right over it,'' said Ms. Johnson, 69, a retired Episcopal church organist and choir leader.
        For this year's Christmas gift swap, Ms. Johnson drew her son Rob, who loves to cook. Her gift to him (she didn't mind sharing in advance): a microplane lemon zester that, she was proud to add, came in well under budget. ''I own one and it's been life-changing,'' she said with wry glee. ''We'll give to charity on our own. I just know he's going to love this.''
        Though Mr. Rodgers loves the charitable gift his wife gave to him this year, he said he likely would not respond in kind. ''It would be more of a copy-cat move if I turned around and got her the same kind of thing this year,'' he said. ''So I'm thinking I'll probably stick with something more traditional that I know she'll like.''
        In hindsight, Ms. Rodgers said she hoped that her gift didn't create undue pressure for her husband. ''I don't want him to feel like he needs to top it or anything,'' she said. ''Actually, I am kind of hoping for a new pair of pajamas.''
      