
        Senator Evan Bayh, Democrat of Indiana, who just two weeks ago took the first steps toward a White House bid in 2008, announced Saturday that he was quitting the race. He said he had concluded that his hopes of winning were too remote to make it worth continuing.
        Mr. Bayh's withdrawal, which stunned many Democrats, came less than a week after he saw his visit to New Hampshire overshadowed by the crush of attention surrounding a trip there the same day by Senator Barack Obama of Illinois.
        In much of the national coverage by the news media, the contest has been portrayed, notwithstanding the expanse of the Democratic field, as a race between Mr. Obama and Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York, complicating efforts by lesser-known candidates to hire staff members, raise money and get noticed.
        ''The odds were always going to be very long for a relatively unknown candidate like myself, a little bit like David and Goliath,'' Mr. Bayh said in a statement. ''And whether there were too many Goliaths or whether I'm just not the right David, the fact remains that at the end of the day, I concluded that due to circumstances beyond our control the odds were longer than I felt I could responsibly pursue.
        ''This path, and these long odds,'' the statement continued, ''would have required me to be essentially absent from the Senate for the next year instead of working to help the people of my state and the nation.''
        The statement was posted on the Web site of The Indianapolis Star, which disclosed news of Mr. Bayh's decision Saturday in its newspaper.
        Mr. Bayh, 50, is a two-term senator. He is also a former governor of Indiana, experience he had emphasized in an effort to stand out in a field dominated by senators. And he is from a well-known Indiana political family; his father, Birch, was a senator from 1963 to 1981, when he was defeated by Dan Quayle, and ran for the White House in 1976.
        The decision by Mr. Bayh came even though he had about $10 million on hand; he began preparing for this race right after he was re-elected to the Senate in 2004. To some extent, Mr. Bayh's withdrawal reflects the degree to which Mr. Obama and Mrs. Clinton have dominated the early going, threatening to soak up campaign contributions and news coverage.
        Mr. Obama has not said whether he will run. And even many Democrats who have expressed interest in an Obama candidacy acknowledge his relative inexperience in public office. He is a first-term senator, and he has not experienced the rigors and scrutiny that come with campaigning for president.
        In such a volatile atmosphere, and with concerns among many Democrats about Mrs. Clinton's viability as a general-election candidate, party leaders believe there is at least a chance that a lesser-known candidate could emerge.
        Mr. Bayh is the second Democrat to withdraw after drawing interest. Mark Warner, the former governor of Virginia, who spent much of the past two years preparing for a bid, said earlier this year that he would not run, citing family considerations.
        Mr. Bayh had sought to establish himself as a moderate. He is a former leader of the Democratic Leadership Conference, which provided the political base for Bill Clinton before he ran for president, and he comes from a part of the country not typically amenable to Democrats.
        Mr. Bayh told about 100 contributors and supporters of his decision in a conference call on Saturday. Participants said Mr. Bayh recounted how he and his advisers had decided to pull out before asking longtime supporters to commit money and time -- including moving to states to set up operations -- in what was evolving into a difficult task.
        ''There just wasn't room this year,'' said Greg Farmer, a former Florida Democratic Party official who was on the call with Mr. Bayh.
        His decision is likely to be a lift for John Edwards, the former senator from North Carolina and candidate for vice president in 2004. Mr. Edwards, who was defeated in his first presidential primary bid by Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts early in 2004, is planning to announce his second run in a tour to begin in New Orleans at the end of the month, Democrats familiar with the plan said Saturday.
      