
        The day before Christmas three years ago, Inmate No. 92B-0448 sat in front of a computer at the Elmira Correctional Facility and typed a harsh letter to the man he thought should have been in prison in his place.
        ''Witnesses can commit perjury, judges can be fooled and juries can make mistakes,'' the letter read. ''When it comes to DNA testing, there's no mistakes. DNA is GOD's creation and GOD makes no mistakes.''
        The inmate, Roy Brown, was serving 25 years to life for the 1991 murder of a social worker, Sabina Kulakowski, who was found naked, beaten, bitten and strangled outside the farmhouse where she lived in Aurelius, a town of 3,000 on the northern tip of Cayuga Lake.
        Mr. Brown, a self-professed hard drinker who made a living at the time selling magazine subscriptions in Syracuse, 30 miles to the east, did not know Ms. Kulakowski. Just six days before her killing, though, he had been released from jail, where he spent eight months for making threatening phone calls to another social worker at the agency where she worked.
        Nor did Mr. Brown know the man to whom he was writing, Barry Bench. It was only that year, 2003, that Mr. Brown had uncovered witness statements that pointed toward Mr. Bench, whose brother had been the victim's boyfriend.
        Five days after receiving Mr. Brown's accusatory letter, Mr. Bench committed suicide by jumping in front of an Amtrak train.
        Two weeks ago, DNA tests matched a sample provided by Mr. Bench's daughter to saliva stains on a bloodied nightshirt found at the crime scene, and now Mr. Brown is scheduled to appear in court on Thursday to ask the judge who presided over his original trial to vacate the conviction.
        ''I used the old hunting technique here: if there's a killer in the bush, I'm going to flush him out,'' Mr. Brown, 46, said in a telephone interview from prison. ''I know that they can keep me in jail after I show up in court. But the world will know that I'm innocent, and that was my main goal.''
        Mr. Brown's lawyers at the Innocence Project, a nonprofit legal clinic that has helped exonerate 188 people since 1989, said his case stood out because it was the first in which the convicted man essentially investigated and solved the crime himself.
        The lawyers, Peter Neufeld and Nina Morrison, have also questioned the reliability of forensic evidence in the case, since the conviction rested largely on expert testimony linking bite marks found on Ms. Kulakowski's body to Mr. Brown even though they showed indentations from six upper teeth and he had four.
        The Cayuga County district attorney, James B. Vargason, did not respond to numerous requests for comment on Wednesday, but Mr. Brown's lawyers said they expected him to oppose their motion. Mr. Vargason took office two weeks before Mr. Brown's trial and tried the case personally; he has since used it to build a reputation as a get-tough prosecutor.
        Help came to Mr. Brown from an unlikely source: Mr. Bench's 19-year-old daughter, Katherine Eckstadt, who volunteered a sample of her DNA. A private investigator had tracked her down through her mother, who had told sheriff's deputies in 1991 that Mr. Bench acted suspiciously the night of the murder.
        The recent DNA tests have excluded Mr. Brown as the source of the saliva on Ms. Kulakowski's nightshirt and showed half of the DNA profile matched Ms. Eckstadt's, suggesting the saliva could have come from her father.
        ''I had to know the truth,'' Ms. Eckstadt said last week in an interview in the basement of a Baptist church in suburban Syracuse where her mother works as a secretary. ''How was I supposed to live knowing that I could have helped Roy Brown, yet I let him rot in prison?''
        Mr. Brown was arrested on May 26, 1991, three days after Ms. Kulakowski's battered body was found on a dirt road about 300 yards from the farmhouse, which had been set afire, investigators said, possibly by the killer in an attempt to cover his tracks. Mr. Brown had just been released from jail for making threatening calls to a county Social Services Department worker who had ordered his 7-year-old daughter removed from his home. Though Ms. Kulakowski also worked for the agency, she had no involvement in the case.
        Mr. Bench, on the other hand, knew the victim well. His older brother, Ronald, had been romantically involved with Ms. Kulakowski for 17 years and had lived with her at the farmhouse, which their parents had given to Ronald. The couple separated in the spring of 1991, and Ronald Bench moved to Auburn, but he allowed Ms. Kulakowski, who was 49, to continue living at the farm.
        ''For a while, Barry was angry at his brother because he felt that he should have been the one to own the farm,'' said Tamara Eckstadt, Katherine's mother, who lived with Barry Bench for 13 years.
        Mrs. Eckstadt said that Barry Bench did not seem to dislike Ms. Kulakowski, but that their relationship was ''antagonistic,'' in part because of the farm.
        The night of Ms. Kulakowski's murder, Barry Bench left his house at 5 p.m., after a fight with Mrs. Eckstadt, according to his and her statements to investigators at the time. Mr. Bench, a volunteer firefighter, went to a bar, carrying his fire monitor, which he rarely shut off. He left the bar at 12:30 a.m., their statements said. Mrs. Eckstadt told the police that he arrived home, drunk, about an hour later, even though the bar was just a half-mile from where they lived.
        She said Mr. Bench never plugged the fire monitor back in after arriving home, which was unusual.
        Though the farmhouse began to burn around the time Mr. Bench was unaccounted for, investigators did not question his whereabouts, instead focusing within days on Mr. Brown.
        At the trial in 1992, Mr. Vargason argued that Mr. Brown had killed Ms. Kulakowski in a fit of rage against the social services agency. The case rested largely on testimony by Dr. Edward Mofson that Mr. Brown could have left the bite marks on Ms. Kulakowski's body despite the discrepancy in the number of upper teeth. He said that Mr. Brown could have twisted her skin while biting her, therefore filling the gaps that would have been left by his missing teeth.
        The defense's lone witness, Dr. Homer Campbell, a forensic odontologist from New Mexico who has testified about bite-mark evidence in numerous criminal trials, sharply rebutted Dr. Mofson's assertion, but it was not enough to convince the jurors. Mr. Brown was convicted of second-degree murder after less than six hours of deliberation.
        Ms. Kulakowski's parents and two sisters have all died. Thomas Murray, her brother-in-law, said in a telephone interview from his home in Omaha, Neb., that the family had never heard of Mr. Brown before his arrest, and that he was unaware of the evidence pointing toward Mr. Bench.
        ''Sabina touched the lives of many people through her work, and we could never understand why someone would kill her,'' Mr. Murray said. ''When that happened, we didn't have any reason to suspect anyone in the Bench family, or anybody else, for that matter.''
        Ronald Bench, a real estate broker in Auburn, refused to comment when reached on his cellphone Wednesday. ''I don't have anything to say,'' he said.
        The results of the DNA tests came back on Dec. 6; Mr. Brown has said that he has wondered since then what might have been had he laid his hands on Mrs. Eckstadt's statement -- and others mentioning the unaccounted hour in Mr. Bench's night -- at the time. ''I could have showed them to the jury,'' he said.
        One of Mr. Brown's original lawyers, Katy Karlovitz, said that when asked about the statements after Mr. Brown uncovered them in2003, prosecutors said they had turned them over before trial. But Ms. Karlovitz said she never received them, and there are no records of the statements in a list of documents that is included in the court file.
        Mr. Brown learned about the statements only because of a fire at his stepfather's house in 2003 that destroyed his trial records. He filed a request under Freedom of Information laws seeking new copies, and among the documents he received were statements from Mrs. Eckstadt, Mr. Bench and two of their neighbors.
        Mr. Brown, a father of four, has been married four times, twice while in prison, where he teaches guitar and helps run counseling sessions. He has liver problems that leave his skin a pale yellow. He has never ceased to profess his innocence.
        But his three appeals were denied, along with his 1995 request for DNA tests on the nightshirt. He took to drafting motions from prison, calling his stepfather, William Murphy, several times a week for help.
        ''I've lived from phone call to phone call, from one disappointment to another,'' Mr. Murphy, 63, said in an interview from his home in Boonville, N.Y., southwest of the Adirondack Park. ''Sometimes I got discouraged, but Roy always came back with another motion, with another way out. He never let me give up.''
        At the same time, Mr. Brown's sister, Billie Jo Kuczynski, put together a petition asking people to support his request for DNA tests on the nightshirt. She distributed 36,000 copies around the state, even tucking them on car windshields at the Cayuga County courthouse.
        In January 2005, the Innocence Project joined the case, eventually filing the motion for the DNA testing that ultimately led to the match with Mr. Bench's daughter.
        ''Whatever happens, I've already proven my innocence; I'm already free,'' Mr. Brown said. ''I may be in prison, but my spirit is free.''
      