
        The state worker whom Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi used as a chauffeur for his ailing wife for what he described as security reasons actually performed personal errands for her and helped her rehabilitation from knee surgery, a settlement agreement released on Tuesday by the state attorney general's office claimed.
        Under the terms of the settlement, Mr. Hevesi agreed to pay more than $206,000 to resolve an inquiry by the attorney general's office into his use of the state worker, Nicholas Acquafredda, and three other state employees to chauffeur wife, Carol Hevesi, and act as companions for her.
        The inquiry found that Mr. Acquafredda rarely reported to the comptroller's office, instead eating lunch with Mrs. Hevesi at the comptroller's home in Somers, N.Y., in Westchester County, and acting as her companion ''on virtually a full-time basis.''
        While the new report averted a lawsuit, it does not end Mr. Hevesi's legal and political troubles. He is still the subject of a criminal inquiry by the Albany district attorney and an inquiry by a special counsel, David Kelley, who was assigned by Gov. George E. Pataki to investigate the matter. And Governor-elect Eliot Spitzer will also almost certainly ask the Republican-controlled State Senate to consider removing the comptroller from office when his term begins in January, people involved in the discussions have said.
        Mr. Hevesi has told associates that he intends to fight to keep his job, and he took a defiant tone after accepting the settlement, saying in a statement, ''as the agreement specifically provides, I do not admit'' the findings, ''and, in fact, I deny many of them.''
        The report contained new details that go beyond a scathing State Ethics Commission review released in October. Some of the new revelations undercut Mr. Hevesi's arguments that the workers were assigned to his wife for security reasons. The report said Mr. Acquafredda ''was not briefed on any specific threat against either Hevesi or his wife and had no regular contact with security personnel.''
        The report also quotes Mr. Acquafredda as saying that if he needed assistance for Mrs. Hevesi, he would ''dial 911.'' He was also quoted as saying that he did not consider himself ''someone who was asked to defend her against an individual.''
        The settlement states that according to Mrs. Hevesi's appointment books, Mr. Acquafredda spent increasing time with her before she had knee surgery in July 2005. ''After the knee surgery,'' it states, ''Acquafredda assisted her for many hours over many days, sometimes aiding with rehabilitative knee exercises at the Hevesi home in Somers.''
        The report also said that three other state workers had performed duties for Mrs. Hevesi that required reimbursement, more than had been previously thought.
        Mr. Spitzer is still the attorney general for another few weeks but recused himself from the Hevesi inquiry. Any proceedings in the State Senate could also be complicated by Mr. Hevesi's re-election after the revelations became public.
        ''The people of New York State spoke loudly and clearly in my overwhelming re-election,'' Mr. Hevesi said, adding, ''the voters have weighed the facts and decided that they want me to serve another four-year term.''
        The inquiry by the attorney general's office was focused specifically on determining how much Mr. Hevesi needed to reimburse the state. Under the terms of the agreement announced on Tuesday, Mr. Hevesi agreed to pay more than $33,000 within 10 days. He paid more than $82,000 in October, after the chauffeur issue first became public, and last month he placed an additional $90,000 in an escrow account at the direction of the attorney general's office. That now goes to the state.
        Mr. Hevesi has apologized repeatedly for his actions and argued that he intended to pay the money back, but the findings of both the Ethics Commission and the attorney general's office have indicated that there was no serious effort at bookkeeping over the several years that state employees assisted Mrs. Hevesi, whose health has been failing.
        Mr. Hevesi also continued to say that genuine fear for his wife's safety motivated him because his work as comptroller had led to death threats.
        In his statement on Tuesday, he said the attorney general's report was largely based on a flawed Ethics Commission report, which he criticized for finding ''that there was no nexus between threats against me as comptroller and my wife's safety.'' But the report from the attorney general's office pointed out that the superintendent of the State Police sent Mr. Hevesi a letter in August 2003 saying, ''There does not appear to be a nexus between your high public office and Mrs. Hevesi's safety.''
        Mr. Hevesi still has powerful allies, most notably the Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, who could play a role in his fate if the matter goes before the full Legislature.
      