
        Home Depot, the home-improvement retailer that has come under criticism for its executive compensation practices and a flagging stock price, faces a fight with an activist investor.
        The investor, Relational Investors, plans to propose at next year's shareholder meeting that an independent committee evaluate the company's direction and management.
        The fund, headed by Ralph V. Whitworth, wrote to the chief executive, Robert L. Nardelli, last week, saying that Home Depot's stock has underperformed since 2000 because of ''deficient strategy, operations, capital allocation, and governance,'' according to documents released yesterday by the retailer.
        ''We are planning an advocacy program designed to spur positive action to address these deficiencies,'' Mr. Whitworth wrote. Relational Investors, which owns about $1 billion of Home Depot stock, or 1.2 percent of shares outstanding, intends to ask shareholders to create a committee to study the company's direction, management performance and strategic options at the annual meeting, which traditionally occurs in May. The fund will also submit at least two candidates for Home Depot's board, including Mr. Whitworth.
        ''There is no accountability to shareholders,'' said Mr. Whitworth in an interview. ''Since Nardelli was made president in 2000, he's taken hundreds of millions in compensation, but the company's return to investors has been almost nothing. There needs to be someone making sure management is watching the store.''
        Since Mr. Nardelli was hired six years ago, the board has awarded him more than $240 million in salary, bonuses, stock grants and company loans, according to Brian T. Foley, a compensation consultant in White Plains. Home Depot's stock price, has increased by about 3 percent over that period. In comparison, shares of a rival, Lowe's Companies, have increased by 177 percent. Yesterday, shares of Home Depot closed at $39.96, up 7 cents.
        Representatives of Home Depot, which had revenue of more than $81 billion last year, declined to respond to Mr. Whitworth's letter, except to release a statement that the ''board of directors unanimously supports the management team and its plan to continue enhancing value for all shareholders.''
        The Home Depot situation is one in what may be a series of corporate battles between shareholders and management when annual meetings begin next spring. Activists may press for changes in corporate governance and other issues at companies including Sunrise Senior Living, based in McLean, Va., and the Brink's Company, based in Richmond, Va.
        Yet few fights may draw as much attention as Home Depot's, which has been tussling with some shareholders since May, when Mr. Nardelli was the only director to appear at the company's annual meeting. At that gathering, an executive for the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees aggressively questioned Mr. Nardelli's compensation and the company's decision to reach beyond the retail market to focus on wholesale buyers, like construction companies.
        At last year's annual meeting, Home Depot shareholders withheld at least 30 percent of their votes from 10 of the 11 directors up for re-election, including Mr. Nardelli.
        Analysts say the company has recently taken major steps to improve performance, like announcing a $3 billion share buyback in an effort to increase the stock's price.
        ''Management is addressing today problems more effectively than in past years,'' said Matthew J. Fassler, an analyst with Goldman Sachs who rates the company neutral. ''In the past three months, Home Depot has taken a number of steps that represent a substantial change in operational and financial strategy, primarily for the better.''
        The company has also amended its bylaws so that incumbent directors not receiving a majority of votes cast must offer their resignations. Mr. Whitworth may be hoping to capitalize on that change. Earlier this year, Relational Investors, based in San Diego, helped push out the top executive at Sovereign Bancorp after criticizing his deal-making.
        Mr. Whitworth says he believes his efforts at Home Depot may increase the company's stock value by as much as 50 percent.
        ''In every case we've been involved in, there's been dramatic change and improvement,'' said Mr. Whitworth, who oversees about $7 billion and typically invests in only about eight companies a year.
        ''We'll use state-of-the-art strategies and tactics to make sure we're heard,'' he said.
      