
        Iranians will go to the polls on Friday in elections that are expected to be a test of whether President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad still has the popular support that led to his victory 18 months ago.
        The elections on Friday are for city councils around the country and for the 86-member Assembly of Experts. The assembly has the power to replace the country's supreme leader, but since it selected Ayatollah Ali Khamenei for that position in 1989, it has been relatively inactive.
        But the city councils exercise substantial political leverage, especially here in the capital. They appoint the mayors, who run the local governments and control the budgets.
        The watchdog Guardian Council, which reviews applications to run for office, rejected 240 nominees out of 490 who initially registered to run for the Assembly of Experts. Others dropped out, and so only 140 candidates remain. The council rejected many candidates who had a lenient stance toward reformers but also some affiliated with Ayatollah Muhammad Taqi Mesbah-Yazdi, a cleric who has often spoken against democracy. Ayatollah Mesbah-Yazdi and a group of his supporters were running against Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, a former president and pragmatist politician, in the hope of dominating the assembly, which is considered less likely now.
        In the Tehran city elections, a slate affiliated with Mr. Ahmadinejad is running against other radicals who have been sidelined by him and against reformist politicians who are trying to make a comeback.
        Members of the slate allied with the president had called on their supporters to vote for those close to Ayatollah Mesbah-Yazdi, the radical cleric, in the Assembly of Experts elections. The group is led by a young former leader of the Basij Militia force, Mehrdad Bazrpash, and the sister of the president is a member.
        Analysts say the group has a chance of winning if the turnout is low. The turnout in the last city elections in Tehran, in 2003, was only 12 percent, after voters who had brought the reformists to power stayed home, concluding that the reformists had failed to create a more open society. That led to victory for the radicals. They appointed Mr. Ahmadinejad as mayor and then nominated him for president.
        His fiery speeches and uncompromising foreign policy on such issues as Iran's nuclear program are causing the country to face possible sanctions. He has also failed to deliver on his promise of improving people's economic status, experts say.
        Reformists are appealing to their supporters to vote in an effort to slow his radical policies. ''This election can be a way for us to find our place in the government again and to try to moderate the situation,'' said Ali Nozarpour, one of the reformist candidates for the assembly.
        Enthusiasm over the election appears to be increasing as the reformists have intensified their campaign at universities and around the city. ''A lot of students are saying that they will vote for the reformers,'' said Sajad Ghoroghi, a graduate student at Amir Kabir University who has decided to vote despite his disillusionment with the reformists.
      