
        Two former government Mideast experts accused the White House on Monday of abusing secrecy rules to block the publication of an article they had written for the Op-Ed page of The New York Times that criticized Bush administration policy toward Iran.
        Administration officials strongly denied that any political censorship was involved and said a routine review by National Security Council officers had found classified information in the article.
        ''The White House is not blocking'' publication of the article, Tony Snow, the White House spokesman, said. ''We don't falsely silence critics on national security claims.''
        Officials said they still believed that it would be possible to reach an agreement with the authors, Flynt L. Leverett and Hillary Mann, on a publishable version of the article. They are career Mideast analysts who say they left the government after becoming disenchanted with administration policies.
        They married in 2003.
        Mr. Leverett, who had worked at the Central Intelligence Agency and the N.S.C. until 2003, and Ms. Mann, who worked at the State Department and the security council until 2004, said they were sure that political considerations were involved.
        ''There is no plausible claim that this is confidential stuff,'' Mr. Leverett said in an interview. ''There's no detail in these paragraphs that has not already been written about by me and other officials.''
        They said the draft article called for a new diplomatic approach to relations with Iran and pointed out that the United States had worked fruitfully with Iran after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and in the Afghanistan conflict in 2002.
        The authors said the administration did not want that history emphasized when it is resisting pressure to renew contacts with Iran.
        In a report this month, the Iraq Study Group, led by James A. Baker III and Lee H. Hamilton, urged the administration to talk with Iran and Syria in an effort to reduce sectarian violence in Iraq. But President Bush and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice have so far rejected that advice.
        As former officials, Mr. Leverett and Ms. Mann are obligated to permit the government to review writings for publication to ensure that secrets are not inadvertently disclosed. Such reviews are limited to searches for classified information, not policy questions.
        Mr. Leverett said that since leaving the government he had submitted drafts of more than 20 articles, several longer studies and a book on Syria to the C.I.A. Publications Review Board and that ''not a word has been changed.''
        Among the publications approved, he said, was a 32-page paper published two weeks ago by the Century Foundation, ''Dealing With Teheran,'' urging a new diplomatic approach to Iran.
        After its publication, Mr. Leverett said, he spoke with Op-Ed editors of The Times about writing with his wife a short article based on the longer document. The Op-Ed editor, David J. Shipley, confirmed that he had planned to publish the article last Thursday and that he still hoped to publish it.
        The Publications Review Board reviewed the longer paper on its own, but this time the C.I.A. passed the shorter article to the National Security Council for review. Council reviewers informed the agency on Wednesday that they had found classified information in the article, and the publication was blocked.
        ''They don't want us to say how many opportunities this administration has missed to put relations with Iran on a better track,'' Mr. Leverett said.
        A spokesman for the intelligence agency, Mark Mansfield, said the agency had erred in not submitting the longer report to the security council because Mr. Leverett worked there in 2002 and 2003. Mr. Mansfield and a council spokesman, Gordon D. Johndroe, said politics had no role in the review.
        Mr. Johndroe said the review had been conducted by career employees with expertise on classifying secrets and no role in making policy. Higher-level policy staff members confirmed their finding, he said.
        Ms. Mann said she submitted the article for State Department review and was told on Thursday that it had not been cleared for publication. On Friday, the C.I.A. sent a new version of the article to the council, Mr. Johndroe said, and reviewers found it still had classified information.
      