
        To the Editor:
        Re ''In Advance of Speech, Bush Seeks Iraq Advice'' (news article, Dec. 12):
        It would be a great thing if President Bush were finally seeking out and listening to advice about the Iraq war. Unfortunately, the modus operandi of this administration is to sift through all the advice it can find, then listen only to the advice that suits its needs and confirms its warped view of the world.
        This is how we got into this mess in Iraq in the first place. Does anyone really think that it will be different this time?
        Michael Walker  Bellport, N.Y., Dec. 12, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Re ''The Time Is Now,'' by Bob Herbert (column, Dec. 11):
        A wide range of policy experts, and millions of citizens, have concluded that it is too late in Iraq.
        Can we stop the deterioration by going the extra mile with one last long shot at trying to snatch a ''win'' from the jaws of defeat? No.
        Can we ever get rid of the argument that failure in Iraq was because of what we did not do? No. Can we improve the chances for ''stability'' in the region by staying? No.
        Can we change the ''narrative'' on the outcome of our invasion and occupation? No.
        The only way to insulate our values and interests from even greater damage is to withdraw, expeditiously. If we drag it out, we are baldly accepting the equation that more American blood must be spilled because of the blood of the 3,000 that has already soaked into the desert!
        It is simply morally wrong not to bring them home.
        President Bush has no shame, not to mention common sense. He has rejected the ''fig leaf'' for withdrawal that the Baker-Hamilton study group offered him. Therefore, the time is fast arriving for Congress to use blunt instruments.
        William E. Jackson Jr.  Davidson, N.C., Dec. 11, 2006
        The writer served in national security posts in the Senate, the State Department and the executive office of the president.
      