
        The Israeli Supreme Court ruled Tuesday that Palestinians in the occupied areas who suffer harm by the army in noncombat operations may seek compensation from the government.
        The unanimous ruling threw out part of a law barring such compensation, but left standing a ban on payment for damage suffered in combat operations.
        The law also bars compensation to citizens of ''enemy states'' or to ''activists or members of a terrorist organization,'' which would include Hamas, elected in January to run the Palestinian Authority.
        The law, passed by Parliament as an amendment in July 2005, sought to make the army, the security services and the state immune retroactively from being sued for damages caused since Sept. 29, 2000, when the second intifada, or uprising, in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip is considered to have begun. Known as the ''intifada law,'' it is thought by the petitioners in the case to have prevented lawsuits worth millions of dollars, which may now be filed.
        Hundreds of family members of Palestinians wounded or killed during military or security operations in the West Bank and Gaza are now expected to file claims, as well as businesses damaged by errant shells or even, perhaps, by the security-based closing of the Karni crossing point between Israel and the Gaza Strip. According to Israel Radio, some 550 damage claims by Palestinians are already pending in Israeli courts.
        Further claims may be filed by Palestinians hurt at checkpoints.
        The court decision, written by the former chief justice, Aharon Barak, is one of several made before he retired. He wrote that Israel's continuous military presence in the territories ''left many harmed who were not involved in any hostile activity.''
        The ruling was criticized by some legislators on the right. Michael Eitan of the Likud Party filed a petition to the speaker of Parliament calling for an urgent meeting on the ruling. Mr. Eitan said the ruling had damaged the army's ability to act in defense of Israel.
        Benjamin Elon of the National Union Party, also on the right, said, ''The High Court that cancels laws and doesn't understand that we are at war is becoming one of the state of Israel's gravest existential problems.''
        The killing of three children of a senior Fatah official on Monday led to new violence in Gaza on Tuesday, as forces loyal to Fatah and to Hamas traded gunfire in the town of Khan Yunis.
        Palestinian security forces loyal to Fatah were demonstrating against the killings and lack of pay when the shooting broke out. Hamas officials said the Fatah men were damaging public buildings. At least four of them were wounded, one seriously.
        A Hamas spokesman and legislator, Mushir al-Masri, accused ''some Fatah leaders'' of ''exploiting the blood of innocent children to earn political gains.''
        Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian Authority president, declared a day of mourning for the children and ordered security forces deployed in Gaza. The Palestinian interior minister, Siad Siam of Hamas, criticized the move, saying Mr. Abbas had not coordinated it with him, and rejected accusations of Hamas responsibility. ''Such statements and accusations do not serve stability,'' he said.
        The killings will increase pressure on Mr. Abbas, who is the Fatah leader as well as president, to try to end the stalemate with Hamas. He is being pressed to fire Prime Minister Ismail Haniya, of Hamas, and to call new parliamentary and presidential elections.
        But it is unclear if he has the authority to call the elections. Internal polls show that Hamas remains popular, and such a challenge less than a year after Hamas won elections could set off a much more serious battle between Hamas and Fatah.
        Three rockets were also fired into Israel from the Gaza Strip on Tuesday, another violation of the shaky two-week-old truce organized by Hamas in return for Israel's pulling troops out of Gaza and ending targeted killings there. The rockets did not cause damage, but they brought the number of rockets fired since the truce went into effect to 21, the Israeli Army said.
        The army and security forces are acting as before in the occupied West Bank.
      