
        In a bizarre standoff that lasted more than seven hours on Thursday, Israel barred the Palestinian prime minister, Ismail Haniya, from returning home to the Gaza Strip, saying he was carrying tens of millions of dollars in cash that could be used for terrorist attacks.
        Mr. Haniya was finally allowed to cross from Egypt into the southern Gaza Strip late Thursday night, but only after leaving the money with Hamas officials who stayed behind in Egypt.
        During his lengthy wait, dozens of angry gunmen from his Hamas movement shot up the Rafah border terminal, clashing first with Palestinian security forces on one side of the border and later with Egyptian security officials on the other side. At least 15 Palestinians were hurt, and most were believed to be from Hamas.
        After Mr. Haniya reached the Gaza side, another round of shooting broke out and one of his sons was wounded and one of his bodyguards killed.
        It was not clear how much money Mr. Haniya was carrying, though the Israeli news media put it at $35 million and said it had been packed in suitcases.
        Several Hamas officials have ferried huge sums of cash into Gaza since the group came to power early this year, saying the money was desperately needed to pay government salaries after the cutoff of Western assistance.
        The chaotic scenes along the border encapsulated the multiple crises facing the Palestinians: the continuing conflict with Israel, the Palestinians' internecine battles and their worsening financial plight.
        Ghazi Hamad, a spokesman for the Hamas government who was traveling with Mr. Haniya, said in a telephone interview that he and other Hamas officials had the money in El Arish, Egypt, about 30 miles from the border. He declined to give the amount.
        Other Palestinian officials said the money would be handed over to the Arab League in Cairo until a way could be found to get it to the Palestinian areas.
        The Palestinians did not say where Mr. Haniya had obtained the money, though speculation focused on Iran. Mr. Haniya spent more than two weeks traveling in the Middle East, including a stop in Iran, which pledged $250 million to the Palestinian government.
        The Palestinians have not placed any restrictions on the amount of cash that can be brought through Rafah as long as the money is declared at the border.
        However, a senior Israeli security official said Israel acted because ''we have reason to believe the money will be used to strengthen Hamas and will be used for terror.'' The official did not provide additional details or say how Israel knew that Mr. Haniya was trying to bring money into Gaza.
        With internal Palestinian tensions escalating in the Gaza Strip, Mr. Haniya cut short his extended tour of the Middle East. He flew from Sudan to Egypt, and began heading overland Thursday afternoon toward the Gaza border. But before he arrived, Israel's defense minister, Amir Peretz, ordered the crossing closed.
        Israel has no troops in Gaza, but it does have forces in southern Israel, just a few miles away from the Rafah crossing, and they could move into Gaza quickly if its order was defied.
        Egypt closed its side of the border, and the Palestinian side shut down when the clashes erupted between the Hamas gunmen and the Palestinian security forces, who are loyal to the Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas, from the rival Fatah movement.
        Israel and Western countries cut the flow of money to the Palestinian government after Hamas came to power in March. The Hamas government has been able to pay salaries only partly and sporadically.
        The Palestinian Authority needs more than $150 million a month for salaries and other basic expenses, and Hamas officials have sought to bring in at least a portion of that amount on their trips abroad.
        When the Palestinians took control of the Rafah border crossing in November 2005, it allowed Palestinians in Gaza to travel to Egypt and on to the wider world without having to go through Israeli security.
        Thursday's episode demonstrated Israel's ability to shut down the border even when its security forces are not present.
        Elsewhere in Gaza, Palestinian internal tensions were still running high. The Palestinian security forces arrested a suspect in the killing of three young sons of a Palestinian security official who were gunned down on Monday as they were being driven to school.
        The suspect, Hisham Mkhaimar, belongs to the Popular Resistance Committees, and his arrest ignited a gun battle between the security forces and members of his faction. Shortly afterward, the Popular Resistance Committees kidnapped a member of the security forces and said he would not be released until Mr. Mkhaimar was freed.
        In the West Bank, Israeli troops shot dead two Palestinian militants in one confrontation, and killed another Palestinian man in clashes with stone throwers, the military and Palestinian witnesses said.
        In Israel, the High Court of Justice addressed one of the most contentious issues in the past six years of violence between Israel and the Palestinians. It ruled that Israel's targeted killings of Palestinian militants were legitimate in some circumstances.
        But the court said Israel's military must exhaust other options first, like trying to arrest suspects, and must take into account the possibility of harming innocent civilians.
      