
        It took 60 minutes of football for the Eagles to secure a 36-22 victory over the Giants on Sunday. But the game was decided during a 23-second span late in the fourth quarter that, depending on how the next two weeks play out, could derail the Giants' hopes of reaching the playoffs.
        ''That pretty much put us in an almost impossible situation,'' linebacker Carlos Emmons said of the quick 15 points the Eagles scored to seize a lead and then put the game out of reach. ''And that's the way the game ended.''
        The Giants were leading, 22-21, having gained an edge midway through the fourth quarter on Brandon Jacobs's 1-yard touchdown run.
        But Eagles quarterback Jeff Garcia fired a 19-yard touchdown pass to Reggie Brown in the back of the end zone on a play that started with 3 minutes 10 seconds left. R. W. McQuarters, beaten on the play, showed his frustration by kicking one of the pylons as if it were an extra point.
        The Eagles went for 2 points, and when L .J. Smith caught Garcia's pass in the end zone, they led by 29-22. The play capped an 80-yard drive that took about four minutes.
        ''The defense never should have let that offense go down and score that touchdown to go up in the first place,'' linebacker Brandon Short said.
        The Giants got the ball on their 20-yard line after the kickoff. There was still plenty of time for Eli Manning to engineer a comeback -- 2 minutes 57 seconds to be exact. Manning helped the Giants overcome a 17-point fourth-quarter deficit in Philadelphia on Sept. 17, when they won in overtime, 30-24.
        The crowd of 78,657 cheered as Manning trotted onto the field. But the fans' hopes of another thrilling finish were dashed in an instant.
        On the first play from scrimmage, the Eagles blitzed Manning, who was looking for wide receiver Plaxico Burress. Manning said he picked up the blitz, but he was still hit by cornerback Sheldon Brown as he threw.
        The ball popped into the air like a firecracker, and Tiki Barber swatted at it in hopes of preventing an interception. He missed, and defensive end Trent Cole corralled the ball after bobbling it and ran into the end zone, high-stepping the final yards.
        The play took all of 10 seconds. David Akers's extra point gave the Eagles a 14-point lead and capped the scoring.
        ''Obviously I made a mistake,'' Manning said, adding: ''I saw the blitz. It's just a matter of I thought I had enough time to get the ball out.''
        Manning hadn't thrown an interception in the Giants' previous two games but it was his second of the day. In the second quarter, his pass up the middle hit the helmet of one of the Giants' offensive lineman and was picked off by Brian Dawkins.
        ''It was a back-and-forth game,'' Coach Tom Coughlin said. ''You saw it. Right to the last tipped interception into the end zone, which never should have happened. But it did. And I would have loved to have seen us take the ball there and see what happens.
        ''I thought we were going to come down and win the game,'' Coughlin added. ''That was the whole idea. We're in position, we've got the football. We got 80 yards to go but they just took it 80 yards. We're in a no-huddle sequence, we feel good about where we are. And then the interception.''
        The interception completed an awful 23-second span for the Giants.
        But at 7-7, they are still in the playoff hunt. With two games left, they have 120 minutes to make up for those 23 seconds.
        PRO FOOTBALL
      