
        James Levine has spent a great portion of his career conducting challenging Italian operas. Italian was again the language of the day when Mr. Levine conducted two major works at a concert on Sunday afternoon by the Met Chamber Ensemble at Weill Recital Hall. But the works, though intensely dramatic, were song cycles, and the composers were American masters: John Harbison and Elliott Carter.
        The first half was devoted to Mr. Harbison's ''Mottetti di Montale,'' an ambitious song cycle of nearly 60 minutes for mezzo-soprano and large chamber ensemble -- the New York premiere of this version. The work is a setting of selected poems from a cryptic, loosely autobiographical verse novel, published in 1950, by the Italian poet and Nobel laureate Eugenio Montale.
        The story tells of a mysterious woman, Clizia, modeled on Dante's Beatrice, and of her exasperated poet lover. The chosen poems evoke images of Clizia's illness and convalescence in Genoa, and of the couple's long periods of separation during and after World War I.
        Mr. Harbison composed the work in 1980 for mezzo-soprano and piano, dividing it into four books. Over the next 20 years he arranged it for a 10-player chamber ensemble, including a keyboardist alternating on harpsichord, organ and celesta. Presented here complete, in this intense, precise and elegant performance, with two rich-voiced young mezzo-sopranos, Kate Lindsey and Tamara Mumford, sharing the solo duties, ''Mottetti di Montale'' emerged as one of this important composer's most inspired works.
        When Montale's poetic images are specific, Mr. Harbison evokes them vividly: street dances during carnival are conveyed through spinning strands of counterpoint over hurdy-gurdy accompaniments in the organ; the line ''A chill falls hard is the severing blow,'' is depicted though a descending series pungently reedy chords in the winds.
        Yet when the text turns elusive, Mr. Harbison's music is still striking for its urgency and precision. Poetic lines about separation (''A wrenching pulls us apart'') are set to unmoored harmonies of ominous intensity and thickly textured, yet lucid, inner lines. Even in moments of emotional torment the vocal writing is refined and lyrically expansive.
        It was a good idea to pair this score with ''Tempo e Tempi,'' Mr. Carter's 1999 settings of poems by Montale for soprano (here the intelligent, bright-voiced Susan Narucki) and six instruments. The first lines of the opening song in this 20-minute work were made to order for Elliott Carter: ''There isn't one time,'' it begins; ''tapes run parallel'' but ''often in opposite directions'' and ''rarely intersect.''
        Mr. Carter is the living master of composing contrapuntal lines that seem to exist in their own time zones, an effect excitingly realized here by the superb Met musicians. For all the Carterian complexity of this score, several sections were wondrously spare, almost aphoristic, with, for example, the pensive soprano line accompanied only by a ruminative solo oboe (the excellent Nathan Hughes). Both Mr. Harbison and Mr. Carter, who turned 98 last week, were in attendance.
        To close, Mr. Levine shifted moods completely and played the piano in the ensemble's ebullient performance of Mozart's Quintet for Piano and Winds in E flat. To judge from Mr. Levine's rippling passagework, his left-hand tremor and right-shoulder injury early this year have not impaired his fine-motor skills.
        MUSIC REVIEW
        Correction:  December 20, 2006, Wednesday  A music review yesterday about the Met Chamber Ensemble, at Weill Recital Hall, referred incompletely to one work. In ''Tempo e Tempi,'' by Elliott Carter, the texts include poems by Giuseppe Ungaretti and Salvatore Quasimodo -- not just Eugenio Montale.
      