
        J. Keith Mann, a Stanford University law professor who negotiated labor disputes for three presidents and wrote a report for the United States Supreme Court that led to the protection of Alaskan barrier islands from oil drilling, died Nov. 27 in Stanford, Calif. He was 82.
        The cause was pneumonia, his daughter Marilyn Mann said.
        Professor Mann joined the faculty of Stanford Law School in 1952 and was named professor emeritus in 1988. He was the school's associate dean for academic affairs from 1961 to 1985 and its acting dean in 1976, 1981 and 1982.
        In 1980, the Supreme Court appointed Professor Mann as a special master to investigate a dispute between Alaska and the federal government over control of offshore areas along the state's northeast Arctic coast. The sites are rich in oil and gas deposits but ecologically fragile.
        The dispute, United States v. Alaska, focused on a chain of islands near the 19-million-acre Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, where Alaska had claimed a right to drill. The state argued that a continuous boundary should be drawn three miles off the coastline to include the islands as Alaskan territory.
        The federal government countered that such a plan would give the state a property windfall by, in effect, turning open sea into inland water. It said three-mile borders should be drawn around each island.
        Professor Mann's 505-page report supported the federal government's position. And in 1996, in a ruling hailed by environmentalists, the Supreme Court upheld his findings. At the time, William C. Reffalt, the director of Alaska programs for the Wilderness Society, said the decision ''means great things for the wildlife up there.''
        ''If you stand in the foothills and look north to the ocean,'' Mr. Reffalt said, ''you don't want to see oil rigs.''
        John Keith Mann was born on May 28, 1924, on a 400-acre family farm in Alexis, Ill., the youngest of three sons of William Young Mann and the former Lillian Myrle Bailey. After two years at Monmouth College, Mr. Mann entered the Navy early in World War II. As part of its Far East studies program, he learned Japanese, then served in Korea and in postwar Japan.
        Mr. Mann received a bachelor's degree in Eastern studies from Indiana University in 1948 and a law degree there a year later. He was a clerk for two Supreme Court justices, Wiley B. Rutledge and Sherman Minton, in 1949 and 1950, then entered private practice in Washington.
        In 1971, President Richard M. Nixon chose Professor Mann to lead an inquiry into a 56-day dock strike that had closed most of the major Atlantic and Gulf Coast ports.
        In 1967, President Lyndon B. Johnson named him to a similar fact-finding board during a West Coast shipyard strike. And during the Kennedy administration, Professor Mann was brought in to help settle labor disputes between the Southern Pacific Company and its railroad clerks and between several airlines and flight engineers.
        Besides his daughter Marilyn, of Kensington, Md., Mr. Mann is survived by his wife of 56 years, Virginia McKinnon Mann; another daughter, Susan Mann of Chevy Chase, Md.; three sons, Andrew, of San Mateo, Calif.; Kevin, of Richmond, Calif.; and William, of San Francisco; and three grandchildren.
      