
        They were supposed to be exercises in grass-roots democracy, events during which Japan's political leaders met and talked with voters more accustomed to a political system in which decisions were simply handed down.
        The government even baptized them ''town meetings,'' or ''TM,'' using English to suggest perhaps that they were something so new, so revolutionary, that their essence could hardly be captured in Japanese.
        But a government report released Wednesday concluded that two-thirds of the town meetings organized by the Japanese government since 2001 were Soviet-style performances with people paid to ask planted questions -- favorable to the government.
        The report was the latest blow for Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, whose approval ratings have plummeted to below 50 percent because he has backed off on political and economic changes undertaken by his predecessor, Junichiro Koizumi. The town meetings took place during Mr. Koizumi's administration, but Mr. Abe had been in charge of the meetings as chief cabinet secretary.
        Out of 174 meetings, 115, or 66 percent, were staged in some fashion. In 71 meetings, organizers mobilized participants and, in at least one case, excluded a perceived troublemaker who had spoken in a loud voice and held posters in previous meetings. In 29 meetings, government officials posing as audience members asked questions; in 15, organizers coached audience members.
        In total, 65 people were paid $43 each to ask questions, according to the report, which was commissioned after earlier revelations about planted questions.
        The prearranged questions raised concerns that ''public opinion was being misled in order to instill government policy,'' the report said.
        In six town meetings focusing on education, the government coached audience members to ask questions that advanced the government's goal to bring patriotism, discipline and moral values to public schools. Revising the Fundamental Law of Education, which was drafted in 1947 during the American occupation to prevent a revival of prewar nationalism, is one of the main goals in Mr. Abe's conservative agenda, which also includes revising the American-imposed pacifist Constitution.
        ''It is extremely unfortunate that this happened, and the people in charge must take responsibility,'' said Mr. Abe, who said he would forfeit three months of his salary.
        Mr. Koizumi established the town meetings as part of a campaign to explain government policies to Japanese voters, who rarely have the chance to express their opinions on policy making, and to seek out their opinions. Typically, Mr. Koizumi attended the meetings with Mr. Abe or other top aides.
        ''It was really unfortunate that these meetings, which were meant to be a dialogue with the public, ended up betraying public expectations and creating distrust in the government,'' said Yasuhisa Shiozaki, the current chief cabinet secretary.
        Opposition politicians accused the government of delaying the release of the report so that it could use its majority in Parliament to push through a bill to revise the Fundamental Law of Education. The parliamentary session is scheduled to end Friday, and Mr. Abe has said that he wants to pass the bill by then.
        Passing the bill would be a rare victory for Mr. Abe who, after a promising start, has suffered a steep decline in popularity since becoming prime minister in late September.
      