
        Corporate Japan is once again on an overseas shopping spree.
        On Friday, Japan Tobacco, the maker of Mild Seven cigarettes, announced that it would pay $19.1 billion to buy the British tobacco giant Gallaher  in the largest-ever foreign takeover by a Japanese company. The offer was unanimously accepted by Gallaher's board, but awaits the approval of shareholders, Japan Tobacco said Friday in a statement.
        Analysts said the deal would help transform Japan Tobacco, the world's third-largest cigarette maker, from a regional player in Asia into a global giant. The company will gain a hefty presence in Western Europe and Russia, and control of brands including Benson & Hedges.
        The deal also caps a year that has seen Japanese acquisitions of foreign companies skyrocket to their highest level in nearly two decades. Unlike the nation's last foray overseas in the 1980s, specialists in corporate mergers said that most of the new deals actually make business sense.
        Two decades ago, many Japanese companies overpaid for movie studios and other trophy acquisitions, and often ended up taking huge losses. In the newest round, most takeovers are more carefully considered, and usually aimed at entering overseas markets or acquiring a foreign company's technology, the specialist said.
        Japanese companies also feel confident enough to buy again as their coffers have refilled with cash, in part because of the recent revival of Japan's economy from its stagnant 1990s. The surge in overseas purchases has paralleled a rise in takeovers among Japanese companies, as deregulation and competition have reordered the nation's corporate landscape.
        ''Too many of the 1980s mergers didn't make business sense,'' said Shoichi Niwa, an executive officer at Recof, a mergers and acquisition advisory firm in Tokyo. ''Today's overseas deals are strategic, and are made to help the Japanese companies win in global competition.''
        According to Recof, Japanese companies took over 362 foreign companies in the first 11 months, the largest number since 459 in 1990. Recof said the value of the takeovers this year was 5.3 trillion yen, or about $45 billion, far higher than last year's total of 1.6 trillion yen. Analysts and government officials said figures do not exist for the value of foreign takeovers in 1990.
        The sharp rise contrasts with declining purchases of Japanese companies by foreign ones, which have been sliding since 2000, Recof said.
        One of the biggest acquisitions this year by a Japanese company was in October, when the electronics giant Toshiba paid $4.1 billion for a controlling stake in Westinghouse Electric, a deal that gave Toshiba access to Westinghouse's nuclear-power technology.
        Other deals include a $3.8 billion takeover by Nippon Sheet Glass of a British rival, Pilkington, and this month's $3.4 billion purchase of Mirant Asia Pacific, the Philippine power company, by the trading company Marubeni and Tokyo Electric.
        Before the Gallaher deal, the biggest takeover of an overseas-based company by a Japanese company had been NTT DoCoMo's acquisition of AT&T Wireless for $9.8 billion in 2000.
        On Friday, Japan Tobacco said its deal with Gallaher would value the company at $14.7 billion, with the rest of the purchase price going to pay off the British company's debt. Japan Tobacco said it would finance the deal with cash and a loan from its investment banker, Merrill Lynch.
        In a statement, Japan Tobacco said the takeover would create a leading global tobacco company with strong positions in both Europe and Russia and other former Soviet republics.
        A former state monopoly that has long been weak outside its home market, Japan Tobacco made its first big acquisition abroad in 1999, spending $7.8 billion for the overseas rights to brands like Camel and Winston from RJR Nabisco.
        After the Gallaher purchase, Japan Tobacco will remain the world's No. 3 cigarette maker by market share, behind the Altria Group's Philip Morris unit and British American Tobacco. Gallaher, based in Weybridge, England, was the world's fifth-largest cigarette maker.
        Japan Tobacco was privatized in 1985, but the Japanese government maintains a 50 percent share. On Friday, Japanese officials characterized the Gallaher deal as a step toward the eventual sale of that remaining government stake.
      