
        The question that has followed the Nets' Richard Jefferson in recent years has been: When would his All-Star talent finally translate into an appearance in an All-Star Game?
        This season, that inquiry has been replaced with a much drearier one: How much will his growth as a player be stunted because of a nagging ankle injury?
        Jefferson, 26, has missed six games this season because of ankle injuries. He twisted his left ankle early in the season, forcing him to sit out five games, and he missed another game because of lingering soreness in his right ankle that started with a sprain during last season's playoffs.
        Now, Jefferson is facing the possibility of needing surgery to clean out loose fragments in his right ankle. The Nets' struggles this season could have much to do with the step that Jefferson, their second-leading scorer last season, has lost for the time being.
        ''There's no question it's an issue with Richard's ankle,'' Ed Stefanski, the Nets' general manager, said recently. ''But hopefully we can get over that. We can't use that as an excuse why we're not playing well.''
        Jefferson will face one of his most difficult defensive assignments of the season Wednesday night when the Nets (10-14) play host to LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers (14-9).
        Jefferson said he believed his ankle problems were not hurting his ability on defense. But on offense his numbers are clearly hurting.
        He is averaging 15.7 points, 4.6 rebounds and 2.3 assists, numbers that are all below his career averages. He is scoring almost 4 fewer points a game than he was at this time last season. His rebounding and assist averages are nearly half of what they were last season.
        ''We're looking at some of the lows of my career,'' Jefferson said referring to his statistics. ''It's not acceptable. Of course it's frustrating.''
        Jefferson is clearly not as explosive as he once was going to the basket. He must often defer to teammates or settle for outside shots. In the past, Jefferson has been one of the quickest Nets at getting down court, something he cannot do as often on bad ankles.
        Coach Lawrence Frank said he was pleased to see Jefferson putting the Nets' problems before his own.
        ''Richard's a winning player,'' Frank said. ''He's going to do whatever it takes to help the team win. It's not like he has to change his game, so to speak. But it's managing that frustration because you may not be able to, on every single night, do exactly what your body won't let you do. He's still finding a way to help the team win.''
        Still, Jefferson seemed bothered that he was not consistently at full speed.
        ''When you can't do that, it makes it tough,'' he said.
        Perhaps most worrisome about Jefferson's injury is that it has come just as he seemed to be reaching his prime. One of the most vivid examples of an ankle problem ruining a career is the Orlando Magic's Grant Hill, who has had three ankle operations since 2000 and has missed more than four full seasons worth of games since then. Hill's ankle problems started with a bone bruise, which eventually gave way to a break.
        Rod Thorn, the Nets' president, is not concerned that Jefferson will follow Hill's path because his injury is much less severe. Thorn said the team doctors believed that if Jefferson had surgery, he would make a full recovery.
        ''I don't see it as anything that's going to curtail his career at all,'' Thorn said Tuesday by telephone.
        Jefferson missed 49 games two seasons ago because of ligament damage in his left wrist. He has prided himself on his ability to play through pain. Yet he may have to come to the realization that sometimes the pain wins out.
        BASKETBALL
      