
        The similarities to the Jets' last trip to the Upper Midwest, two weeks ago in Green Bay, were uncanny. Chad Pennington had a big first half. The Jets scored on five consecutive possessions, though this time they spilled over to the third quarter. And by halftime, the game was essentially over.
        Pennington threw for 247 of his 339 yards in the first half as the Jets (8-6) easily defeated the Minnesota Vikings, 26-13, to help their quest for an AFC wild card spot. Pennington completed 29 of 39 passes on the day, with Laveranues Coles who was shaken up late in the game making 12 catches for 144 yards and one touchdown. Mike Nugent added four field goals.
        Coles lay in the field for several minutes after Vikings linebacker Ben Leber drilled him in the back, following a Napoleon Harris interception with 4:53 to play. He walked off the field.
        The halftime lead wasn't as big as the one against the Packers 23-7, as opposed to 31-0 at Lambeau Field but the effect was the same. The Vikings pulled quarterback Brad Johnson late in the third quarter, after he completed only 10 of 17 passes for 96 yards and was sacked three times.
        The Vikings (6-8) blitzed Pennington early, producing a quick turnover and the first score. Harris sacked Pennington and stripped the ball on the Jets' second play from scrimmage, with linebacker E.J. Henderson recovering on the Jets' 34. Three plays later, a backpedaling Johnson floated a 30-yard touchdown pass to Travis Taylor.
        Pennington then took the Jets downfield in methodical fashion, completing seven of eight passes to four receivers for 56 yards. By the middle of the 12-play drive the Vikings stopped blitzing to drop linebackers into coverage, but Pennington kept finding open receivers. Cedric Houston ran 6 yards for the touchdown as running back Stacy Tutt, just activated off the practice squad, blocked Leber to open a rare hole in the Vikings' NFL-leading run defense.
        The Jets put themselves in position to score on every subsequent possession in the half. Pennington was stellar, completing 22 of 28 passes without an interception in the half, and spreading the ball to seven receivers.
        A muffed placement by field goal holder Ben Graham late in the first quarter foiled what would have been a 37-yard attempt by Nugent. Graham tried passing to Nugent, but the play was broken up. Even though Nugent appeared to try to kick the ball, it was scored an incomplete pass and not a field goal attempt, leaving Nugent's streak of nine consecutive field goals intact.
        The next four possessions ended with Jets points. Nugent connected three times in the second quarter, from 25, 52 and 45 yards. Coles had eight catches in the half, and surpassed 1,000 receiving yards for the season on a 21-yard touchdown grab from Pennington. Coles beat cornerback Fred Smoot to the end zone from the left and appeared to use his right arm to keep Smoot away before leaping for the catch. The Vikings did not challenge the call.
        Defensively, the Jets allowed the Vikings only 91 yards and four first downs in the half. Two first downs came on the Vikings' final drive, when wideout Troy Williamson couldn't keep both feet inbounds on a possible touchdown catch, and Ryan Longwell missed a 49-yard field goal attempt to the right.
        The sellout Metrodome crowd of 63,677 booed Johnson and the Vikings repeatedly in the second quarter, and some began chanting for the rookie backup quarterback Tarvaris Jackson. As Nugent kicked a 45-yard field goal on the final play of the half to make it 23-7, the Vikings ran off the field to more boos.
        A terrific catch by Coles midway through the third quarter on a third-and-seven ' a turnaround, 21-yard grab that the fast-closing safety Darren Sharper nearly intercepted ' gave the Jets a first down at the Vikings' 20. Nugent kicked his fourth field goal of the day, from 20 yards, after the Jets lost 1 yard in three plays on goal-to-go from the 1.
        Fans began walking out late in the third quarter after Eric Barton's third-down sack of Johnson.
        Jackson replaced Johnson on the last play of the third quarter, and his entrance drew the loudest cheers from the crowd since the start of the game. With 6:15 to play, a pressured Jackson dumped the ball to running back Mewelde Moore, who broke two tackles before diving into the end zone for a 35-yard touchdown. A 2-point pass attempt failed.
      