
        The federal judge overseeing a mammoth tax shelter case said yesterday that the delayed trial would begin next fall, but he rejected a proposal by prosecutors to try the defendants separately in two groups.
        The judge, Lewis A. Kaplan of Federal District Court in Manhattan, ordered jury selection to begin on Sept. 17, 2007, in the criminal trial of the 18 defendants, 16 of whom are former employees of the accounting firm KPMG.
        The judge also said that he had tentatively decided not to have separate trials. ''Essentially what I have been offered is the opportunity to have two unmanageable trials rather than one,'' he said.
        The judge said he preferred to have one. The trial -- the largest criminal tax case in history, according to prosecutors -- was originally due to begin last September, but Judge Kaplan postponed it twice, citing concerns over who would pay the defendants' legal bills.
        The trial date could still be changed again, because of uncertainty over the issue of legal fees.
        A federal appeals panel is weighing whether Judge Kaplan had the authority last June to dismiss KPMG's motion to compel the defendants to submit to arbitration over the fees issue. A panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit is hearing KPMG's appeal of the judge's ruling. The defendants had sued KPMG, seeking to force it to pay the fees.
        The 18 defendants are accused of conspiracy and tax fraud by making, selling and, in some cases, using questionable tax shelters that cost the Treasury an estimated $2.5 billion in unpaid taxes.
        In his June ruling, Judge Kaplan criticized KPMG, saying it had bowed to prosecutorial pressure to reverse its longstanding policy and cut off legal fees to the defendants or face a heightened risk of indictment. At the time, KPMG was under criminal investigation for its tax shelter work. Last year, the firm averted indictment and instead reached a $456 million deferred-prosecution agreement, one of the largest of its kind.
        In the June ruling, Judge Kaplan also criticized what he called the government's abusive prosecutorial guidelines. Last week, amid mounting criticism, the Justice Department changed the guidelines, making it unacceptable for prosecutors weighing whether to indict a company to consider whether the company was paying the legal fees of employees caught up in investigations.
        It is unclear whether this policy shift may now strengthen the position of the defendants on the legal fees issue.
        Prosecutors are continuing to turn over to the defense scores of documents, most of them from Deutsche Bank, which is itself under investigation over its work with questionable tax shelters.
        At yesterday's court hearing, John Hillebrecht, an assistant United States attorney in Manhattan who is overseeing the broad inquiries, said there was ''a wide-ranging investigation, and it's still ongoing,'' looking at accounting firms, banks, law firms and investment boutiques that made and sold questionable shelters.
      