
        The Democrats promised sweeping ethics reform in this year's campaign, and now they have control of Congress. But procrastination is a legendary Capitol vice, and there are worrisome signs that the Democrats may already be indulging.
        The most glaring lapse of the Republican-controlled Congress was the abject failure of the House ethics committee to police misbehavior, highlighted by the panel's studied avoidance of the Jack Abramoff lobbying mess. Members were shielded and allegations muffled.
        The need for an independent body staffed by nonpartisan professionals to investigate complaints would seem beyond debate. Good ideas for that were circulating this year, notably a proposal for the creation of an office of public integrity by Representatives Christopher Shays, Republican of Connecticut, and Martin Meehan, Democrat of Massachusetts.
        Rather than committing wholeheartedly to the need for an independent panel, the incoming speaker, Nancy Pelosi, is opting to create a bipartisan task force to study the issue and report back by mid-March. If the motive is a careful sales pitch to secure the idea on both sides of the aisle, voters may tolerate a two-month study approach. But the task force should not be an excuse for more delay or to dumb down a much-needed anticorruption monitor. The fact that the Republican leader, John Boehner of Ohio, has signed on to the study is hardly encouraging, since he was a principal in the failure of the last Congress to pass effective ethics controls.
        We are more encouraged by early papers prepared by Ms. Pelosi's office that outline other needed reforms, beginning with the banning of gifts, meals and travel money from lobbyists. Putting the brakes on lawmakers' borrowing corporate jets for regal-class travel is another promising step reported to be on the Democrats' agenda, as are requirements to disclose and limit the earmarking of pork spending for favored pleaders.
        But Ms. Pelosi hasn't shared these ideas with the public yet, and each detail can attract a thousand devils in the muddlers' art of Washington deal-making. Ms. Pelosi and Harry Reid, the Senate Democratic leader, have a great opportunity to lead the way with clear proposals, offered up front before the usual Congressional scrum blurs the issue.
        The two new leaders should keep foremost in mind the voters' anticipation of a cleaner, more quickly responsive Congress.
        Editorial
      