
        The Supreme Court ruled on Monday that the federal appeals court in California overstepped its authority when it granted a new trial to a murder defendant whose victim's relatives sat at the trial, in the view of the jury, wearing buttons with the victim's picture on them.
        The appeals court, in granting a writ of habeas corpus, found that the buttons were inherently prejudicial and deprived the defendant, Mathew Musladin, of the right to a fair trial.
        Voting 9 to 0, the Supreme Court overturned that ruling in an opinion by Justice Clarence Thomas that did not actually decide whether the buttons were prejudicial. That was, and remains, ''an open question in our jurisprudence,'' Justice Thomas said. And that was precisely where the appeals court had gone wrong, the justices agreed; it had based a grant of habeas corpus on a legal principle that the Supreme Court itself had not adopted.
        A writ of habeas corpus is a judicial declaration that a prison inmate has been wrongfully convicted or sentenced. The decision on Monday was the Supreme Court's latest effort to interpret and apply a 10-year-old federal statute that substantially restricted the ability of federal judges to use habeas corpus to overturn state-court judgments.
        The statute, the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act, provides that the writ ''shall not be granted'' unless the state court issued a decision ''that was contrary to, or involved an unreasonable application of, clearly established federal law, as determined by the Supreme Court of the United States.''
        The statutory language has proved to be a good deal less precise than it looks. When is federal law ''clearly established,'' and what constitutes an ''unreasonable application'' of it? The Supreme Court has been wrestling with these questions, often in contention with the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, which continues to grant writs of habeas corpus considerably more often than the Supreme Court believes it should.
        For example, in this case, Carey v. Musladin, No. 05-785, the Ninth Circuit acknowledged that there was no precisely applicable Supreme Court decision, but then went on to extrapolate from two Supreme Court decisions on the question of the effect of courtroom activities on a defendant's right to a fair trial.
        One decision, from 1976, held that defendants should not be forced to wear prison clothes in the jury's presence. The other, from 1986, considered and rejected the argument that the presence of four uniformed state troopers, seated immediately behind the defendant, deprived the defendant of the right to a fair trial.
        The issue in both these cases, as the Supreme Court phrased it then, was ''whether an unacceptable risk is presented of impermissible factors coming into play.'' The Ninth Circuit applied that test to Mr. Musladin's trial and concluded that the buttons were just such an ''impermissible factor.'' The court also invoked one of its own precedents, a 1990 ruling that found that a rape defendant's rights were violated by spectators at the trial wearing buttons that said ''Women Against Rape.''
        Justice Thomas said the appeals court was wrong on both counts, in relying on a precedent that was not the Supreme Court's own and in extrapolating from Supreme Court precedents that arose in a different context.
        He said the problem was that while both the Supreme Court precedents -- the cases on the required wearing of prison uniforms and on the presence of state troopers -- dealt with ''government-sponsored practices,'' the buttons were worn by private individuals as the result of their private choice. ''This court has never addressed a claim that such private-actor courtroom conduct was so inherently prejudicial that it deprived a defendant of a fair trial,'' he said.
        Although the seven-page opinion did not explore the matter in depth, the distinction between government-sponsored and private conduct is significant in many areas of constitutional law.
        Mr. Musladin was convicted in 1994 of killing his estranged wife's boyfriend, Tom Studer. At the trial, his lawyer objected to the wearing of the buttons by Mr. Studer's family members. But the judge refused to order the buttons removed, saying they presented ''no possible prejudice to the defendant.''
        A California appeals court upheld the conviction, finding no proof that the buttons were ''taken as a sign of anything other than the normal grief'' of the victim's family.
        The Federal District Court in San Francisco declined to issue a writ of habeas corpus, a decision overturned last year by a panel of the Ninth Circuit in a 2-to-1 vote.
        While all nine justices agreed on Monday that the Ninth Circuit should be reversed, Justices John Paul Stevens, Anthony M. Kennedy and David H. Souter did not sign Justice Thomas's opinion, each writing separately to explain his view of the case.
        Justice Souter said the distinction between private and public conduct should not matter, because the judge in any event was obliged to keep the courtroom ''free of improper influence.''
        Justice Kennedy said the question of wearing buttons in a courtroom ''should be explored in the court system'' and in a future case. Even before then, he said, habeas corpus should be available to a defendant who can show that the trial was ''tainted by an atmosphere of coercion or intimidation,'' whether by buttons or some other factor.
      