
        In the midst of a brief chat in his office last week, Representative Dennis J. Kucinich mentioned that, oh, by the way, he planned to run for president again in 2008.
        ''Yes, I am,'' Mr. Kucinich, Democrat of Ohio, said in response to a reporter's question about a possible encore to his bid in 2004.
        Mr. Kucinich's wife, Elizabeth Harper, who was seated next to him, arched her eyebrows in apparent surprise.
        Asked if he had told anyone this yet, Mr. Kucinich said no.
        ''You just happened to ask,'' he said.
        Then he walked out of his office and informed his press aide.
        The news from Mr. Kucinich, a six-term congressman, underscores the ''What the heck?'' sensibility that seems to be governing some entries into what may be the most crowded presidential field in history.
        Besides the possible Rudys, Hillarys and Baracks, the names on the Great List now seem to include every Tom, Dick or Sammy. That would be Gov. Tom Vilsack, Democrat of Iowa; former Representative Dick Armey, Republican of Texas; and Senator Sam Brownback, Republican of Kansas.
        In recent weeks, Tommy G. Thompson, the Wisconsin Republican who was once Health and Human Services secretary, and Representative Duncan Hunter, Republican of California, have also thrown themselves into consideration.
        So how about Mr. Kucinich?
        Never mind that he did not come close to winning any primaries or caucuses in 2004. Mr. Kucinich, who plans to announce his candidacy formally on Tuesday in Cleveland, said he liked his chances.
        ''Why not?'' he said, adding a horse-racing metaphor, ''I run very well on a sloppy track.''
        He trotted out this line in 2004, too, for what it's worth.
        While Mr. Kucinich was no thoroughbred in this or the last field, he gained the instant cachet that being a major-party presidential candidate confers.
        ''There is a level of intrigue that goes with being a potential presidential candidate,'' said former Senator Tom Daschle, a South Dakota Democrat who was a ''potential presidential candidate'' himself until he ruled out a run this month. Mr. Daschle said that he had been introduced thousands of times as a ''potential presidential candidate'' over the years, and that that had generally been a good thing.
        Still, Mr. Daschle cautioned that the field could get unmanageable, saying, ''I think, at a certain point, you'd need to become more discriminating about who's viable.''
        In many cases, potential candidates take themselves out of the running, as several have recently, including former Gov. Mark Warner, Democrat of Virginia; Senator Russell D. Feingold, Democrat of Wisconsin; and Senator Bill Frist, Republican of Tennessee.
        ''You're always going to have people who say they're exploring a campaign just to milk the attention,'' said William G. Mayer, a professor of political science at Northeastern University in Boston who has studied presidential nominating campaigns. ''And then, in the end, they don't get in.''
        Mr. Kucinich will not be one of these. He said his early opposition to the war in Iraq, which he voiced strenuously in 2004, would make him more formidable in 2008.
        ''It's a totally different landscape this time around,'' he said, adding that he decided to enter the race last week when he came to believe that the new Democratic leadership in Congress was not committed enough to ending the war.
        He says he plans to show up for every debate he is invited to -- and even if not, he may show up anyway.
        ''This is where it comes in handy to be a vegan,'' Mr. Kucinich said. ''I don't take up that much space.''
      