
        Karen R. Tolchin, the daughter of Susan J. Tolchin and Martin Tolchin of Washington, was married yesterday to Thomas DeMarchi, a son of Kathleen M. DeMarchi and William E. DeMarchi of Peabody, Mass. Aisha Baptiste, the deputy registrar of the Ministry of Legal Affairs of St. Lucia, officiated at the Sandals Regency resort in St. Lucia.
        The bride, 36, and the bridegroom, 37, both teach English in the department of language and literature at Florida Gulf Coast University in Fort Myers; she is an assistant professor, and he is an instructor. She is the author of ''Part Blood, Part Ketchup: Coming of Age in American Literature and Film'' (Lexington). She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's degree and a Ph.D. in English and American Literature from Brandeis.
        The bride's father is a senior publisher and editor of The Capitol Leader, a newspaper in Arlington, Va., that is to start publication in January. He is the founder of The Hill, a newspaper that reports on Congress, where he was the editor in chief and publisher from 1994 to 2003, and was until 1994 a correspondent in the Washington bureau of The New York Times. The bride's mother is a professor of public policy at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va. Together, the bride's parents have written seven books, including the recently published ''A World Ignited: How Apostles of Ethnic, Religious and Racial Hatred Torch the Globe'' (Rowman & Littlefield).
        The bridegroom graduated from Merrimack College in Andover, Mass., and has two master's degrees, one in English from California State University, Fresno, and another in fiction from Florida International University in Miami.
        The bridegroom's parents are both retired. His mother, a registered nurse, worked at Boston Regional Medical Center in Stoneham, Mass. His father worked as an accountant at Fidelity Investments in Boston.
        The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.
        The couple met at Florida Gulf Coast University's orientation for new faculty in August 2004, two days before Hurricane Charley struck the area.
        After the orientation, Ms. Tolchin and Mr. DeMarchi went separately to see their offices for the first time, and ran into each other again. This time, Mr. DeMarchi was in the company of his mother, who was helping him move in. The two women immediately hit it off.
        Mr. DeMarchi, who lived two-and-a-half hours from campus, was searching for a place closer to campus. Because of the impending hurricane, he was forced to find temporary quarters.
        Ms. Tolchin, who had just moved into a new town house near the university, offered him the use of her couch and made him a spare key.
        ''Most people would find that incredibly reckless behavior,'' Ms. Tolchin said. ''But I had met his mother, and couldn't imagine anyone with a mother as nice as his turning out to be an ax murderer.''
        They became good friends, and two weeks after the hurricane, he took her to dinner as a way of thanking her. A few months later, they talked about the possibility of dating, but were worried that a relationship might jeopardize their jobs.
        ''We didn't know if there was a policy against dating,'' Mr. DeMarchi said. ''We couldn't find anything in the handbook.''
        Ms. Tolchin decided to write to the chairman of their department to ask if they were allowed to date each other.
        ''The chairman wrote back saying that he thought we'd make a great couple and gave us his blessing,'' Ms. Tolchin said. ''People ask what we would have done if he'd said no, but I can't even imagine.''
        WEDDINGS/CELEBRATIONS
      