
        WILL success spoil Doo-Ri Chung?
        Over the last few years, as her fashion line, Doo.Ri, has become that rare thing in fashion, a quiet and reliable smash, Ms. Chung has learned that running a good business is like looking after a child -- a hungry one.
        Her weekly volleyball game: a thing of the past. Ditto cooking dinner. ''We never see our apartment,'' Ms. Chung said. Her husband, Jeffrey Green, has joined her as a business partner, so at least she gets to see him.
        Ms. Chung's fine-tuned creations resonated with enough serenity and glamour for her to have received the 2006 CFDA/Vogue Fashion Fund award last month, but those luxuriant qualities are in shorter supply in her life, certainly more so than when she was merely dreaming and planning her solo act while working in Geoffrey Beene's design studio.
        ''There's so much about fashion that's not about design,'' she said with a patient smile.
        In her clever way, she does what she can for a little diversion. For one, she is growing an herb garden in the south window of her studio in the notions district off Fifth Avenue as a nod to her erstwhile domestic life. And watching over the enterprise is a ghostly little presence that, like Ms. Chung herself, is caught between being and becoming.
        A gift from her husband last year, it is a Munny doll, a $25 white vinyl toddler from Kidrobot. It was designed by the store's owner, Paul Budnitz, in 2005 as a do-it-yourself version of the myriad cartoonish Kidrobot figures. Munny is meant to be personalized in whatever manner its owner chooses: Magic Marker, crayon, decal, paint, blowtorch. But as devoted a problem-solver as Ms. Chung is, she has not even put on her thinking cap.
        ''I love it all white,'' she said. That is not, as one might think, because of some Beene-ian adoration of abstraction, purity and form, but rather because of the wealth of possibility the little dough boy offers.
        ''I love its potential,'' she said. ''It's so great that someone came up with the idea of this, something that everyone can have their different visions of.''
        The doll brings to mind her brief foray running a retail store, during which she learned two valuable lessons: one, that a simply constructed dress changes enormously depending on how those wearing it project themselves. ''It's really more about personality than size,'' she said. ''There's a real alchemy to it.'' (The second lesson: ''I didn't like retail.'')
        But inasmuch as the doll hints at the limitless possibilities the future may hold, it is also a charming token of the irony-rich, retro-mad pop-culture world that, as a hot fashion designer, she is regularly called on to interact with, an obligation she views with suspicion bordering on alarm.
        ''This really contradicts what I do,'' she said of the Munny. ''It's very whimsical, and my clothes aren't whimsical. They're analytical. I don't do retro. I don't believe in it.''
        Indeed, the Munny doll, quiet and need-free, is just about the only figure of the modern pop landscape that she can deal with, and she can't even figure out a way to dress it. So don't ask her if there is some star she is dying to design for; she will only draw a blank.
        But she draws them so beautifully, can you blame her?
        POSSESSED
      