
        The time may have come for Alan G. Hevesi to begin channeling his inner Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
        That is, if he has an inner Powell. We're talking about very different personalities.
        Mr. Powell, the Harlem congressman, gave breadth to the word ''flamboyant.'' He was a rascal with a quick wit, a big grin, even bigger cigars and a taste for Cutty Sark mixed with milk. He especially liked one writer's description of him as ''arrogant, but with style.'' When his world started to collapse under the weight of scandal, he encouraged supporters to ''keep the faith.''
        Mr. Hevesi, the New York State comptroller, is almost the linear opposite. He is aloof, the sort who seems unable to suffer even smart people gladly. Were he ever to utter a memorable phrase, it would more likely than not be something on the order of ''keep the car.''
        But there is a good reason for Mr. Hevesi to find that inner Powell -- somewhere, anywhere -- and fast. He is nearing a showdown with forces that want him out of office for having abused the taxpayer's wallet. By his own admission, he did wrong. For years, he let the state pick up the hefty tab for a car and driver for his long-ailing wife, Carol.
        His situation is not identical to Mr. Powell's back in the 1960s, but it will do.
        Because of his legal troubles and allegations of financial shenanigans, the congressman was booted from the seat he had held for 22 years. The House of Representatives voted in 1967 to exclude him.
        But two months later, in a special election, Harlem voters sent him right back to Congress by an overwhelming margin. They kept faith with him once more in the regular 1968 election. And the following year the United States Supreme Court ruled, 7 to 1, that it was unconstitutional for Mr. Powell's House colleagues to have excluded a duly elected member.
        In other words, the voters count -- a lot.
        This simple proposition bears directly on the fate of Mr. Hevesi, who, despite his unadmirable behavior, was re-elected last month, and by a handsome margin at that.
        Some people have cast the Hevesi case as a test of the governor-elect, Eliot Spitzer, who has disavowed the comptroller and presents himself as a man of uncommon morality. W.W.E.W. -- what would Eliot want? -- is for some the guiding light.
        For some newspaper editorialists, the issue boils down to how Mr. Hevesi, as the state's chief watchdog, can now point accusatory fingers at wrongdoers when he himself is so flawed. Never mind that most major newspapers have printed falsehoods in their time -- mighty whoppers, even -- yet do not feel disqualified from publishing.
        But we have those pesky voters.
        They knew about Mr. Hevesi's misdeeds, and still they handed him another term. The comptroller has been emphasizing this point, suggesting that perhaps some Powell-channeling is indeed at work.
        SUDDENLY surfaced is an article once written for the Fordham Urban Law Journal by Michael A. L. Balboni, now a Republican state senator from Long Island. Courts have ruled, Mr. Balboni wrote as a young lawyer in 1987, that when the public knows fully about an official's misconduct and re-elects him anyway, the vote amounts to ''an exoneration.''
        He in no way defends what Mr. Hevesi did, Mr. Balboni said yesterday. Nonetheless, assuming that no other size-17 shoes drop (like an indictment by an Albany grand jury), ''the question is vox populi,'' he said. ''Does it mean that we truly trust the decision of the jury: the voters?''
        Another thought came from Henry J. Stern, a former city parks commissioner, now director of a watchdog group called New York Civic. If the State Senate or Assembly removes Mr. Hevesi, or if he is forced to resign, a new comptroller will be chosen by the very politicians he is supposed to monitor. Not good, Mr. Stern wrote the other day in his organization's newsletter. ''The state comptroller is an independent elected official for a valid reason,'' he said.
        Douglas A. Muzzio, a professor of public affairs at Baruch College, framed the issue even more bluntly: ''Do you have a lapdog watching over you?''
        Back to vox pop: It has a strange tendency to slice many ways.
        Mr. Powell died in 1972 at age 63, two years after he narrowly lost a Democratic primary to Charles B. Rangel, who still holds that Congressional seat. Harlem voters kept the faith. They just remembered that their primary allegiance was not to a man but to democracy.
        NYC E-mail: haberman@nytimes.com
      