
        Gunmen sprayed a car with bullets Monday morning in Gaza City, killing three young brothers, ages 3 to 9, who were the sons of a senior Palestinian security officer. The shootings further inflamed an already tense situation among Palestinian factions locked in a political power struggle.
        No group claimed responsibility for shooting the brothers, though their father is a member of Fatah, the secular faction that long dominated Palestinian politics and is now in an escalating confrontation with Hamas, the militant Islamic group that currently heads the government.
        While Palestinian factions have frequently battled in recent years, the fighting has not spiraled entirely out of control. However, the deaths of the three boys outraged many Palestinians and heightened fears that they could cause revenge attacks.
        The boys' father, Baha Balousha, a colonel in the General Intelligence service, was regarded as one of the figures involved in a Palestinian Authority crackdown on Hamas members a decade ago and has long been at odds with the group, Palestinians said.
        In a large, unruly funeral for the boys on Monday afternoon, Fatah members fired their guns into the air as the procession wound its way through the dusty streets of Gaza City. Fatah supporters also set tires ablaze, blocking main streets, and many stores and schools closed.
        The Palestinian Authority president and Fatah leader, Mahmoud Abbas, speaking in the West Bank city of Ramallah, called the shooting ''an ugly and inhuman crime perpetrated by a bunch of lowlifes.''
        The attack began as three masked gunmen emerged from two cars and opened fire with automatic rifles, pumping bullets into the white sedan that was carrying the boys from their home to a private school in the Rimal neighborhood of Gaza City. The bullets killed Osama Balousha, 9, and his brothers Ahmed, 6, and Salam, 3. The car was pocked with dozens of bullets, and the seats and schoolbags inside were drenched with blood.
        Mr. Balousha, who was at home but usually travels in the car, may have been the intended target. The car had darkened windows, making it difficult to determine who was inside. Mr. Balousha escaped an attack by gunmen in September.
        His driver and bodyguard use the car to take the children to school each day before returning for him, family members said. The bodyguard was killed and the driver seriously wounded in the shooting on Monday, Shifa Hospital said.
        Mr. Balousha said people whom he did not identify, who want the Palestinian presidency and its intelligence services to fail, were responsible for the killings. In recent months, Palestinian gunmen have carried out several shootings against Fatah members in the General Intelligence service, which deals with a range of security issues.
        While security officials have been targets, it is highly unusual for their family members to come under attack. Also, Gaza's lawlessness is not limited to the rival political factions. Criminal gangs and powerful clans have also been involved in violence in many instances, making it difficult to determine who is behind many of the attacks.
        Just a day earlier, unidentified gunmen fired on a convoy of cars carrying the Palestinian interior minister, Siad Siam, but no one was hurt. He is responsible for many of the Palestinian security agencies, but his authority is limited because he is a Hamas member, while most security agencies are led by longtime Fatah loyalists.
        Fatah members of Parliament issued a statement calling on the president to dismiss the Hamas government, saying the group was ''pushing us with its policies and programs to civil war.''
        Hamas denounced the killings.
        ''This is a gruesome crime,'' said Mahmoud Zahar, the Palestinian foreign minister and a Hamas leader. ''Those who committed this crime have no conscience and are using it for political goals.''
        The factions have been holding talks to try to form a national unity government, but Mr. Abbas says those talks are at a dead end. He is expected to make an announcement soon on how he intends to break the deadlock, and associates say he is leaning toward new elections for both the presidency and the legislature.
        However, Hamas is challenging his authority to call an early parliamentary ballot, saying such a move would amount to an attempted coup.
        The Israeli newspaper Haartez reported Monday that Mr. Abbas was offering the job of national security adviser to Muhammad Dahlan, a former Gaza security chief and a prominent Fatah member who has a long-running rivalry with Hamas. Palestinian officials have not commented on the report.
        When the Palestinian Authority was established in 1994, the Palestinian leader at the time, Yasir Arafat, created multiple security agencies and packed them with Fatah members. Hamas refused to take part in the Palestinian Authority, and few of its loyalists took government positions or joined the security forces.
        But since Hamas won Palestinian parliamentary elections in January, the group has been feuding with Fatah over control of the security forces.
        Under the Palestinian system, the president, the prime minister and the interior minister are supposed to share authority over the security agencies, and all belong to the National Security Council.
        However, the prime minister, Ismail Haniya, of Hamas, and the interior minister, Mr. Siam, have established little control. Fatah members still dominate the security agencies, and with Israel and Western countries cutting off money to the Hamas-led government, security force members and other government workers have been paid only sporadically this year.
        The Hamas government has effectively created its own security agency, the Executive Force, which consists of several thousand members. Most either belong to Hamas or are closely aligned with it.
      