
        A 58-minute game was down to its final tick last night, and the Knicks needed precision, which they generally lack, and good fortune, of which they have had none.
        Jamal Crawford had to zip an inbounds pass high enough to elude the Charlotte Bobcats, low enough for David Lee to slap at and accurately enough to beat a clock that had just one-tenth of a second showing. The Knicks had never practiced the play. Coach Isiah Thomas had never before drawn up such a play.
        But the pass was perfect and the tap divine, and the Knicks ended the game with a group hug after pulling out a thrilling 111-109 double-overtime victory at Madison Square Garden.
        They are 2-0 since brawling with the Denver Nuggets and losing four players to suspension. And that ranked as only the second most surprising element of the night.
        By rule, a team cannot inbound the ball and get off a jump shot with anything less than three-tenths of a second on the clock. The clock starts when a player touches the ball, so the only play available to the Knicks was a tap-in.
        ''I've never seen a play like that,'' Crawford said. ''And it worked to perfection.''
        Lee said: ''The toughest part of that play, though, is making a quality pass. Think about where Jamal threw that ball from. That's a heck of a pass right there.''
        The Knicks (11-17) were ebullient, the Bobcats (6-18) somewhere between stunned and impressed.
        ''I'm in awe from that one,'' Charlotte's Emeka Okafor said. ''Did that actually happen?''
        Bobcats Coach Bernie Bickerstaff said the Knicks' play was ''perfectly executed,'' a compliment the Knicks do not often hear.
        But the Knicks are now specializing in unlikely situations and unpredictable storylines. They trailed by 19 points in the second quarter and by 4 in the first overtime. They did not lead in the second overtime until Lee tapped the ball in.
        A few days ago, the Knicks were the shame of the league for causing the worst N.B.A. brawl in two years. Last night, Thomas beamed with pride.
        ''Very, very proud to be associated with this group of young men trying to find themselves in the league,'' he said.
        The Knicks used misdirection on the final play, letting Eddy Curry draw away the defense. But Crawford's pass still had to elude the lengthy and athletic Gerald Wallace, who stood in the paint next to Lee. Wallace did not appear to get a bead on the ball until it was past him.
        ''Really, I think the thing that just confused him about the whole play is he thought that I was going to set a back screen for Eddy,'' Lee said. ''At that point, I think he was lost in space a little bit.''
        Michael Jordan watched the play unfold from a courtside seat, lending a bit of historical symmetry to the moment. The N.B.A.'s rule on scoring with less than three-tenths of a second left was created after the Knicks' Trent Tucker beat Jordan's Chicago Bulls in a game at the Garden on Jan. 15, 1990. With one-tenth of a second left, Tucker caught an inbounds pass, turned around and hit a 26-footer for a 109-106 victory.
        Crawford got redemption on the final play. He had chances to win the game at the end of regulation and the end of the first overtime. Both times, he misfired from long range -- with an errant 22-footer at the fourth-quarter buzzer and a 27-footer at the overtime buzzer.
        The Knicks, who beat the Utah Jazz on Monday, had not won consecutive games since mid-November, when they beat Washington and Miami.
        Curry, who went dormant for three games, returned to form, scoring 29 points. He had 11 in the third quarter, when the Knicks turned a 13-point deficit into a 7-point lead. Channing Frye had 10 points in that third-quarter burst and finished with 30 to tie his career high. Crawford had 25.
        The Knicks trailed by 19 in the first half, when the biggest cheers were for an old rival (Jordan, now a Bobcats part-owner) and the best shooting came from an opposing rookie (Adam Morrison, who had 14 points in the half).
        The Knicks played their third straight game without Quentin Richardson (back spasms), their seventh without Steve Francis (knee tendinitis) and their second without three suspended brawl participants -- Nate Robinson, Jared Jeffries and Mardy Collins.
        Stephon Marbury scored his 15,000th point early in the third quarter. The achievement was noted in large digital type on the scoreboard, but it was not announced, and the fans did not react.
        Marbury did not get much lift from the moment, either. He did not make another field goal all game, finishing 2 for 12. He did not score again until the final minute of the first overtime, when he hit a free throw, and finished with 10 points.
        Ninety-eight others have reached the 15,000-point mark, and five of them were in the building: Jordan, Ewing, Thomas, the Knicks' assistant coach Mark Aguirre and the Knicks broadcaster Walt Frazier.
        REBOUNDS
        Jerome James was back in uniform and feeling a little embarrassed by the cause of his one-game absence. James was suspended for stepping onto the court during Saturday night's brawl -- breaking a rule that every N.B.A. veteran has been repeatedly drilled on. Players cannot leave the bench area during a fight, even to play peacemaker. ''A rule is a rule,'' James said. ''But at the time, I thought it was going to escalate higher than it looked. So I was going to try to break them up. But as soon as I stepped across I knew -- like, ooh!'' Quentin Richardson quickly grabbed James from behind, but it was too late. His feet were already on the court.
        PRO BASKETBALL
      