
        IF you ever wanted to get a sense of organized labor's political potency in New Jersey, this was the week to be in Trenton.
        On Monday, the teachers' union, the New Jersey Education Association, and unions representing state government employees, firefighters and others criticized the Legislature's proposals to change their pension and health benefits as a means of slashing property taxes. About 14,000 people rallied in front of the State House, the State Police said, and many wore black buttons reading, ''In November, We'll Remember.''
        What was more telling, though, was that at least 15 legislators -- 6 Democrats and 9 Republicans -- left the politically safe confines of the State House to attend the rally and to stand behind the labor leaders who were giving speeches. The legislators would wait to be recognized publicly, then wave to the crowd and go back inside.
        The legislators may have been outside for only a few seconds, but rest assured that labor leaders were paying close attention.
        Some of the legislators have long been staunch allies of labor. These include Assemblyman Joseph Cryan of Union County and Assemblywoman Linda R. Greenstein of Mercer County, both Democrats, and Assemblymen Bill Baroni of Mercer County and Joseph R. Malone III of Burlington County, both Republicans.
        But there were a few surprises, too. Assemblyman Jon M. Bramnick, a Republican from Union County, was there. So were Assemblymen Nelson T. Albano and Jeff Van Drew, two Democrats from the southern tip of the state whom union leaders had criticized for opposing Gov. Jon S. Corzine's attempts to plug a $4 billion budget deficit by raising the sales tax by one percentage point.
        Some labor leaders say, not for attribution, that they suspect a few of the legislators showed up to give the impression of being supportive -- and also perhaps to garner support for 2007, when all 120 members of the Legislature face re-election. After all, there are nearly 800,000 union workers in New Jersey, or one-fifth of all employees, according to the federal Department of Labor. Union workers tend to vote, and usually for Democrats who are responsive to their issues.
        At a political panel discussion on Wednesday at a conference organized by the New Jersey Business and Industry Association, Jim Hooker, a New Jersey Network reporter, raised the interesting question of whether even someone as wealthy as Mr. Corzine still needed labor's support to get out the vote in order to win in New Jersey.
        Mr. Cryan, who is also the chairman of the state Democratic Party, said, ''Oh, no question,'' before explaining that the majority of the 16,000 volunteers who helped elect Robert Menendez to the United States Senate were union workers.
        But Tom Wilson, chairman of the state Republican Party, offered a blunter assessment of Mr. Corzine's ties to labor. ''He understands his relationship just the way a Christian understood a relationship with the lion back in Roman days,'' Mr. Wilson said. ''This is a big piece of the puzzle for him.''
        ON POLITICS
      