
        The Department of Education said yesterday that it would close five failing high schools, including Lafayette High School in Brooklyn, where teachers and students have sparred bitterly with the principal for months.
        Four of the schools, including Lafayette, are being run by principals who graduated from the New York City Leadership Academy, a privately financed training program created by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg. Department officials said that despite those principals' best efforts, their schools had proved unsalvageable.
        The other schools to be closed are Samuel J. Tilden and South Shore, two other large Brooklyn high schools, as well as two small schools in Manhattan, Urban Peace Academy and School for the Physical City. The schools will phase out gradually over three years starting next September, when they will not take new ninth-grade classes.
        The large schools will be replaced by collections of small schools with about 400 or 500 students each, a signature strategy of the Bloomberg administration, which has closed or is in the process of closing 17 other large schools across the city.
        Education officials said that the schools to be closed had notably low four-year graduation rates, did a particularly poor job helping students who were already behind as incoming freshmen, and proved exceedingly unpopular with prospective students.
        The three large schools have all had safety problems. Extra police officers and security guards were put into each of them after each school was named an ''impact school,'' although South Shore and Lafayette were taken off the list after improving.
        David Cantor, a spokesman for Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein, said that during the 2006 high school admissions process, South Shore was considered the least popular school in the city, with only 1.2 applications for every available slot, a figure that could have easily included students listing the school as the last of their 12 choices. At Tilden, he said, 43.5 percent of students scheduled to graduate in 2006 did so.
        But the closing of Lafayette is the one that will probably draw the most attention. For decades after it opened in 1939, Lafayette, in Bensonhurst, was a gem of a neighborhood school, with alumni including Larry King and Sandy Koufax.
        In recent years, the school's performance and safety record plummeted; 44.4 percent of the class of 2006 graduated on time. Among other troubles, the school was the subject of a 2004 consent decree between the city's education department and the United States Department of Justice, which found evidence of ''severe and pervasive peer-on-peer harassment of Asian students.''
        In a last-ditch effort to turn things around, Jolanta Rohloff was named the principal at Lafayette in time for the 2005-6 school year. She quickly angered many of her teachers, who complained that they felt belittled after she offered them extra money to decorate hallway bulletin boards, pushed recent immigrants into English-only classes and overruled grades that some teachers gave students. Efforts to reach Ms. Rohloff at her school and through e-mail messages yesterday afternoon were unsuccessful.
        Mr. Cantor said yesterday that Ms. Rohloff had ''performed extremely well in highly difficult circumstances.'' He said the principals of all five schools would remain as principals, although they could be reassigned to other schools. The preponderance of Leadership Academy graduates among the five, he said, was a factor of the ''extremely tough'' assignments that the academy's graduates are often given.
      