
        Speaking softly and carrying a big hiking stick, Gov. George E. Pataki turned from the wooded trail here to the environmentalists who had gathered for a valedictory hike through woodland they had all helped protect.
        ''Everyone ready?'' the governor asked, planting his hiking stick in the ground.
        ''Yes,'' answered Rose Harvey, the mid-Atlantic regional director for the Trust for Public Land, a conservation group. ''But why are we hiking past land you've already protected? We should be going past land in danger of being developed, so you'll buy it.''
        Governor Pataki has bought a lot of land that way, to protect parks from the encroaching McMansions or to link trails or to keep forests from becoming subdivisions. Quite a lot of land.
        This week, in his second to last one as governor, Mr. Pataki reached a milestone: he secured a deal to increase the amount of land that he has preserved to more than one million acres, more land than exists in the entire state of Rhode Island.
        Those land deals give Mr. Pataki a record on land preservation unmatched by any New York governor since Theodore Roosevelt, that other outdoorsy governor with a big stick.
        The final piece of the puzzle, which the governor plans to announce on Thursday, is the acquisition of a conservation easement on 51,000 acres upstate in St. Lawrence County from Rayonier, a forestry company.
        The state will pay $6.5 million for the easement, which will expand hiking, fishing, boating and camping opportunities for the public, and Rayonier will agree to practice sustainable forestry on the land.
        ''It's something that I have been passionate about since I was a little kid,'' Governor Pataki, wearing faded jeans and a baseball cap instead of a pinstriped suit, said in an interview during the hike.
        ''I was like 6 or 7 or 8 years old, and I remember typing with two fingers to all the Western parks commissioners for maps of their state parks and recreation areas, and waiting. All of a sudden these maps would be coming in from Montana and Wyoming. I just always loved the outdoors. I grew up outdoors.''
        Now, as Governor Pataki prepares to leave office at the end of the year, he spends a lot of time talking about his legacy. He usually talks about crime, tax cuts, the state's finances and Sept. 11 -- issues that can become clouded by questions about who deserves the credit for the drop in crime, or the state's continuing high tax burden and its long-term fiscal outlook, or the slow pace of redevelopment at the World Trade Center site.
        To many environmentalists and even to critics, it is Mr. Pataki's record on land preservation that stands out as his most concrete, perhaps most enduring legacy.
        His successor, Governor-elect Eliot Spitzer, a Democrat, called the million-acre milestone a ''remarkable achievement.''
        ''Protecting a million acres of open space is a remarkable achievement for which Governor Pataki deserves enormous credit,'' Mr. Spitzer said in a statement. ''All New Yorkers have benefited from his vision to preserve natural resources and enhance the state's great outdoor tradition.''
        With the new easement agreement in upstate New York, Governor Pataki has secured agreements to protect 1,020,000 acres in New York, from new sections of the Pine Barrens and a new state park in Jamesport on Long Island, to huge swaths of land in the Adirondacks, at a cost of $658.4 million, officials said.
        Only a little more than half of those agreements are done deals, officials said.
        All told, the deals protecting 553,721 acres are done; the deals for the rest of the acreage, state officials said, are in the contract phase, or are awaiting complex title searches, or have been purchased by nonprofit conservation groups, which will sell them to the state.
        The deals were made possible by his successful campaign for a $1.75 billion environmental bond act in 1996 and his decision to set aside money in the budget for environmental projects.
        While some environmental groups have criticized the governor for not doing more in the areas of regulation and enforcement, the governor's success in preserving land is almost universally praised by them (although it has met with resistance in some parts of the Adirondacks, which is starved for economic development).
        For his farewell hike, Mr. Pataki chose Clarence Fahnestock Memorial State Park, a site 50 miles north of New York City that has more than doubled in size during his administration.
        He led a small entourage of aides and administration members and environmentalists and a couple of state troopers up the granite-flecked trail to Candlewood Hill, stopping along the way to taste some wintergreen leaves. (Being in the Pataki entourage can be a rustic experience: one of his troopers once lost a police radio during an off-trail scramble through a bramble.)
        Once he reached the top of the hill (followed by his state parks commissioner, Bernadette Castro, who at times seemed less than thrilled by the uphill hike), the governor looked out at a vista of hemlock forests and hills and valleys, with the odd glassy lake, and even a slice of the Hudson. Below was a 261-acre swath of land that he had worked to preserve in 2004 near Oscawana Lake.
        ''They were preparing a subdivision, and had even cut the road,'' the governor recalled.
        Then, although the planned hike was over, the governor let himself be talked into another hike, up one of the hills overlooking Oscawana Lake. Some of the entourage groaned. But from the top, there was a view of 2000 feet along the front of the lake that were preserved.
        ''Once it's gone,'' the governor said, ''it's lost forever.''
        After the hike, over a late lunch, Ms. Harvey, of the Trust for Public Land, asked Mr. Pataki if he saw the environment as his great legacy.
        ''Well, I always say that the most important thing the government does is protect its citizens,'' the governor said, discussing the anticrime laws he pushed for and then talking about his fiscal policies.
      