
        Larry Sherry, whose brilliant relief pitching in his rookie season with the Los Angeles Dodgers propelled them to all four of their victories over the Chicago White Sox in the 1959 World Series, died Sunday in Mission Viejo, Calif. He was 71.
        The cause was cancer, the Dodgers said.
        Coming off a seventh-place finish in 1958, their first season in Los Angeles after leaving Brooklyn, and with their stars from the Ebbets Field years aging, the Dodgers seemed unlikely to create a stir in the '59 season.
        But they captured the National League pennant in a playoff series against the Milwaukee Braves with a boost from Sherry, a right-hander who was called up from the minors in early July. Winning his seventh straight game, Sherry pitched seven and two-thirds innings of scoreless relief in the Dodgers' Game 1 playoff victory.
        The White Sox routed the Dodgers, 11-0, in Game 1 of the World Series, but Sherry took over after that. He had saves in Games 2 and 3, then won Game 4 in relief of Roger Craig. He pitched five and two-thirds scoreless innings in relief of Johnny Podres in Game 6, becoming the winning pitcher again as the Dodgers clinched their World Series victory. Pitching 12 2/3 innings over four games, he gave up one run and eight hits and was named the most valuable player of the Series.
        That Sherry was pitching in the majors, let alone starring, seemed a long shot. He was born with club feet, requiring surgery as an infant, and he wore special shoes after that.
        A native of Los Angeles, Sherry was signed out of high school by the Brooklyn Dodgers' organization in 1953 and had mixed success in the minor leagues. But while pitching in Venezuelan winter ball after the 1958 season, he developed a slider, with help from his brother Norm, a catcher and later his Dodgers teammate. The slider complemented his fastball and curve.
        ''By the time the winter season was over, I knew I could depend on the slider, even in a jam, and it proved to be the turning point of my career,'' Sherry told The Los Angeles Times.
        Pitching almost exclusively in relief, Sherry remained with the Dodgers through 1963, then pitched for the Detroit Tigers, the Houston Astros and the California Angels. He had a 53-44 record with 82 saves in 11 major league seasons. He was later a pitching coach for the Pittsburgh Pirates and the Angels.
        In addition to his brother Norm, he is survived by a son, Scott; a daughter, Susie; his brothers Stan and George; and five grandchildren.
        Sherry's World Series heroics catapulted him from obscurity to celebrity, but he was not quite ready for that.
        ''I get called to go on 'The Ed Sullivan Show' the following Sunday,'' he told Bob Cairns in the book ''Pen Men,'' about relief pitchers. ''I had to go out and buy a suit. I didn't own one.''
      