
        The latest report on consumer prices showed that inflation was following an arc that must give some relief to the Federal Reserve.
        Prices fell last month on everything from a gallon of gasoline to fresh vegetables and children's clothing, helping to contain the overall rate of inflation at zero, the Labor Department reported yesterday.
        The core inflation rate, a measure closely watched by the Fed because it excludes the volatile prices of food and energy, was also zero.
        For the Fed, which has bet that a slowing economy would temper inflation, the latest numbers appear to bolster its decision to keep interest rates steady. The central bank on Tuesday kept rates unchanged at 5.25 percent for the fourth consecutive time, and gave its clearest nod yet to emerging soft spots in the economy.
        The government reported separately yesterday that industrial production -- a measure of output at the nation's factories, mines and utilities -- was essentially flat from October through November.
        ''The inflation scare of 2006 is over,'' Kenneth Beauchemin, a United States economist with Global Insight, said in a research note. ''Much credit belongs to the Fed.''
        Stagnant prices combined with stunted economic growth make it less likely that the Fed will increase interest rates early next year.
        Wall Street also appeared to think so, and investors propelled shares to new highs yesterday. The benchmark Standard & Poor's 500-stock index and the Dow Jones industrial average both closed at record levels.
        Resurgent inflation could still spoil the trend of calm price increases, particularly if gas prices spike or employers start passing on the cost of rising wages to consumers.
        ''Don't get too carried away,'' said Ken Matheny, senior economist with Macroeconomic Advisers.
        He said the news should ease the Fed's concerns. ''But I wouldn't go too far,'' he added. ''It doesn't establish a new reality.''
        Though prices have steadied since the summer, the core inflation rate for the year remains at 2.6 percent, well above the 2 percent that the Fed has said it considers healthy.
        While yesterday's figures suggest that the economy is gently gliding into a period when prices will be tame and growth steady, economists dispute just how orderly the decline in growth will be and how much prices will fall.
        On the one hand, the price deceleration has been broad-based. Just as the cost of gasoline was responsible for much of the run-up in prices earlier this year, falling fuel prices have brought down inflation. In addition, prices either fell or barely increased last month in most of the major categories that the government surveys for the consumer price index. Fruit and vegetable prices tumbled along with prices for airline tickets, automobiles and prescription drugs.
        But the cost of housing climbed last month, reflecting the higher cost of natural gas and other utilities.
        The price of oil, always a volatile economic force, is one of the wild cards. In fact, OPEC said Thursday that it planned to reduce its output quotas by 2 percent in February, a move intended to keep crude oil prices elevated next year. Oil prices closed up almost a dollar yesterday at $63.43 a barrel.
        The other wild card is labor costs. Economists cautioned that rising wages could pressure businesses to raise prices in the months ahead.
        ''People have been expressing a lot of relief over declining energy prices while seeming to neglect the rise in labor costs,'' Richard F. Moody, chief economist with Mission Residential, a real estate investment firm. ''Now with oil over $60 a barrel, it looks like it could be both energy costs and labor costs.''
        For the first time in four years, wages are significantly outpacing inflation. A separate Labor Department report yesterday showed that while wage gains have slowed slightly in the last month, workers are still enjoying the strongest buying power in years. When adjusted for inflation, the average hourly wage of a worker in a position below management level rose 2.3 percent. November was the third consecutive month that wages rose at more than 2 percent when inflation is factored in, the first time that has happened in five years.
        Not all economists are convinced, however, that the recent rise in wages threatens to push inflation back up. Jared Bernstein, an economist at the Economic Policy Institute, said when inflation was not taken into account, wages had increased about the same year-over-year rate since this summer.
        ''Inflation hawks are always going to look to the phantom menace of labor costs,'' he said. ''What real wage growth we've achieved has come from slower price growth. And that's been a long time in coming. Don't stop the party just when the working class gets there.''
        Correction:  December 20, 2006, Wednesday  An article in Business Day on Saturday about the latest report on consumer prices, which showed that inflation was being held in check, referred incorrectly to Friday's close of the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index. (The error was repeated in the DataBank on Sunday.) The close of 1,427 was a six-year high, not the record high. (The record was 1,527 in March 2000.)
      