
        Realogy, the giant real estate franchisor that owns Coldwell Banker, Century 21 and Sotheby's International Realty agreed yesterday to be sold to Apollo Group, the private equity firm, for about $9 billion.
        The deal marks the latest play by private equity firms to buy into the real estate business just as it appears to have peaked. Just two weeks ago, Blackstone Group led a $36 billion deal to acquire Equity Office Properties Trust, the nation's largest office building owner and manager, for about $36 billion, which was the biggest buyout in history.
        The deal will be another huge payday for Henry R. Silverman, the architect behind Cendant, the conglomerate that Realogy was part of until it broke itself into four pieces earlier this year in an effort to revive its flagging stock price.
        Mr. Silverman, who had been criticized for huge paydays while he was at Cendant, stands to make about $135 million by selling all of his shares and stock options as part of the deal. Mr. Silverman, who is now the chairman and chief executive of Realogy, is expected to stay on until his contract expires at the end of next year. However, Mr. Silverman will not be an equity participant with Apollo in the deal, and his out-of-the-money stock options (those below the strike price) will be canceled.
        ''I think it is a conflict to be the C.E.O. and to be the buyer,'' Mr. Silverman said in an interview, taking a swipe at management-led buyouts where the chief executive buys out his own company.
        Realogy is among the biggest players in the real estate field, taking part in a fourth of all home sales nationally. It has more than 300,000 agents among its franchises, almost three times more than its closest rival, Re/Max International. It is also a player in commercial real estate through its Coldwell Banker Commercial arm.
        Yet the company has seen its fortunes decline as the real estate market has slumped. Sales have dropped from 2005, a record year, and more homes are staying on the market longer. The rise in home prices has slackened to the slowest pace seen since 1998, according to government reports. And the National Association of Realtors said earlier this month that it expected home sales to continue to decline next year.
        Moreover, Internet-based brokerages and discount shops may have dealt a further blow to traditional real estate brokerages. Commissions have fallen to an average of 5 percent from 6 percent a decade ago, although experts say that slide had begun before the entrance of the discounters.
        For the quarter that ended Sept. 30, Realogy reported net revenue of $1.73 billion, a decline from the $2.08 billion it earned as a part of Cendant a year ago.
        ''Our earnings are going down,'' Mr. Silverman said. ''We're probably not going to see a recovery until 2009. This deal is an insurance policy.''
        He said he had decided to pursue the deal with Apollo, which approached the company earlier this year, because, ''we need to be owned by someone with a five-year time horizon,'' suggesting that many public shareholders, including hedge funds, have a ''five-second horizon.''
        Under the terms of the deal, Realogy shareholders will receive $30 a share in cash, a premium over the stock's Friday closing price of $25.50. Apollo said it would commit $2 billion of equity to Realogy.
        The deal is expected to close in the spring of 2007, but Realogy may solicit other buyout proposals until Feb. 14. in what is known as a ''go shop'' provision. Should it accept another offer, Realogy will pay Apollo a breakup fee.
        Mr. Silverman said the company decided against a full auction because it could be ''very destabilizing to the staff and customers.'' He said that the deal with Apollo meant ''an outcome is guaranteed'' that company would be sold and that a potential higher offer could still be sought.
        Apollo, which said that it was strongly positioned to take Realogy forward, is no stranger to the company or the industry. In 1997, Apollo and Cendant formed NRT, or National Realty Trust, as a joint venture to consolidate various fragments in the residential real estate market. NRT revenues then grew to $3 billion by 2001, and it made 200 acquisitions and added $1.5 billion in annual commission revenues. Cendant bought out Apollo's stake in NRT in 2002.
        ''Realogy's powerful real estate brands and their long heritage of leadership in the industry serve as a strong platform for future growth and we are pleased to again have it as part of our investment portfolio,'' Marc Baker, a partner at Apollo, said in a statement.
        Realogy, along with the rest of its former Cendant brethren, has long been seen as a potential target for a private equity buyer. Its $500 million in annual cash flow and relatively small debt were seen as attractive to such firms. And analysts have said that residential real estate companies like Realogy often find rough times on Wall Street, where the cyclical drops in the housing markets have taken a toll on such companies' share prices. Some of Realogy's competitors, like Re/Max, are already privately held.
        Evercore Partners advised Realogy on the deal, while Skadden Arps Slate Meagher & Flom served as legal counsel. J. P. Morgan Chase and Credit Suisse were Apollo's financial advisers, while Wachtell Lipton Rosen & Katz worked as its legal counsel. J. P. Morgan, Credit Suisse and Bears Stearns will provide Apollo with debt financing.
      