
        The Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas, on Saturday ordered early presidential and parliamentary elections in a direct challenge to the authority of Hamas, the Islamic movement that won elections less than a year ago. But Mr. Abbas did not set a date, leaving room for further negotiations to break the impasse with Hamas and form a unity government instead.
        ''I have decided to call for early presidential and parliamentary elections,'' Mr. Abbas said. ''Let's return to the people to have their say, and let them be the judge.''
        Hamas leaders immediately called Mr. Abbas's declaration illegal and tantamount to a coup, saying that he had no power to call early elections and that the Palestinian people had given them a majority in free and fair elections only 11 months ago.
        Mr. Abbas's declaration, in a speech in the West Bank that brimmed with frustration, was both a challenge to Hamas and a risky effort to break a political stalemate that could backfire.
        After months of rising tension and violence between Hamas and Mr. Abbas's Fatah movement, there was concern that the rivalry could veer into something approaching civil war.
        In the past few days, there have been killings of Fatah officials and their children and an attack on the motorcade of the Hamas prime minister, Ismail Haniya, in which his son and a political adviser were wounded and his bodyguard was killed.
        By putting his own presidency at stake, Mr. Abbas risks losing an election against Mr. Haniya, placing the entire Palestinian Authority in the hands of the Hamas movement. Hamas is considered a terrorist group by Israel, the United States and the European Union, which all cut off money for the Palestinian Authority after the faction's election victory.
        But it is also likely that Mr. Abbas's challenge is intended to get Hamas to agree at least to a government of experts and technocrats that would be approved by all factions and that could qualify for renewed financing. ''My aim,'' Mr. Abbas said, ''is a national unity government to lift this crisis and siege.''
        Mr. Abbas, in a winding 90-minute speech, blamed Hamas for breaking its agreements with him, reneging on its promises and trying to intimidate other Palestinians by using the words of Islam in political debate.
        He insisted that he had the right to call the elections, though many political experts, even in his own party, believe he has the right only to fire the current prime minister and cabinet. Under the Palestinian basic law, only the legislature can dissolve itself, those experts say.
        Foreign Minister Mahmoud Zahar of Hamas said that the call for new elections was illegal and that ''we will not participate.'' He said Mr. Abbas had distorted the truth, was violating the precepts of democracy and Palestinian law and simply wanted to overturn the January election to benefit his own Fatah movement.
        ''If he is tired, he should resign and we'll have a presidential election,'' Mr. Zahar told Al Jazeera television. As for parliament, Mr. Zahar said, ''the majority of the Palestinian people voted for Hamas, and because he lost this trial, he wants to change.''
        Mr. Abbas ''is looking for a pro-American and pro-Israeli government from those who have already failed the Palestinian people,'' Mr. Zahar said.
        In Gaza, Ahmed Baher, the deputy speaker of the legislature, said: ''He can't dismiss the legislative council. Such a decision violates the basic law.''
        The basic law allows the president to appoint and dismiss the prime minister and the government. But it is silent on whether he can dismiss the parliament without its consent. The law mandates the parliamentary term as four years and makes it clear that any election must be approved by the parliament.
        Ahmed Yussef, an adviser to Mr. Haniya, said in Gaza, ''Today what we have heard from Abu Mazen is a call, which, God willing, we will try to avoid, for a civil war.'' He warned that the call by Mr. Abbas, who is commonly known as Abu Mazen, for early presidential and parliamentary polls was unwise in this period of tension between Hamas and Fatah and ''will lead to internal strife and also could cause a lot of casualties.''
        But Saleh Zidan of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine said, ''There is still time for a comprehensive, successful national dialogue to form a unity government.''
        Hamas legislators and officials boycotted Mr. Abbas's speech, which he gave in his headquarters in Ramallah and was televised live on Palestinian television and Al Jazeera. There were some organized Fatah demonstrations in support of Mr. Abbas in Nablus and in Gaza, and Hamas said it would call for rallies to oppose the move.
        In Gaza City later Saturday, several thousand Hamas supporters, including some members of Fatah's Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades, rallied in front of the parliament building while speakers condemned Mr. Abbas. There were clashes later between gunmen of Hamas and Fatah, and a dozen people were reported wounded.
        Mr. Abbas let his frustrations with Hamas boil over in his speech, making it clear that he questioned whether they were sincerely interested in a unity government. He accused them of calling him a ''national patriot one day and a traitor the next,'' of continuing a policy of rocket fire from Gaza ''that is counterproductive to our national interest,'' and of refusing opportunities to release an Israeli soldier captured in June, thereby blocking progress with Israel.
        He blamed Hamas for the impasse and detailed his efforts over the past six months to reach agreement on a unity government that would meet Western requirements for aid and be able to again pay its 160,000 or so employees.
        Israel and the West have funneled limited aid to Mr. Abbas himself to circumvent Hamas. But Israel is still withholding $55 million a month in duties and taxes it collects on behalf of the Palestinians, a sum now approaching $600 million.
        Most important, Mr. Abbas insisted that Hamas lawmakers were acting against the principles of government he had laid down for them when he swore them into office, in particular by their refusal to acknowledge Israel's right to exist alongside an independent Palestinian state and their refusal to accept previous Palestinian-Israeli agreements negotiated by the Palestine Liberation Organization, which is the legal representative of the Palestinians.
        ''Democracy is a partnership, not an exclusion of the others,'' Mr. Abbas said. ''It is not divine will but the people's will.'' Addressing Hamas, he said: ''You shouldn't label your government as divine. It is democracy, with supporters and opposition. If you try to intimidate us with divine will, this is impermissible.''
        He said Fatah would support a new unity government but would not take part in one, implying that he favored a technocratic government whose members would be approved by political factions but not necessarily be members of them.
        Firing the current government is his right as president, he said. ''The removal of the government is not a recipe for civil war, as suggested by Zahar,'' he insisted, referring to the Hamas official. ''Firing the government is a constitutional right that I can exercise when I want.''
        One of Mr. Abbas's senior aides, Saeb Erekat, argued that the president had chosen a peaceful path out of the crisis, saying: ''Bullets or ballots? Abu Mazen said ballots.'' Another aide who has been pushing Mr. Abbas to act, Yasser Abed Rabbo, said he expected the election to take place in the next three months, but Mr. Erekat said he doubted a vote would happen until June.
        There were many questions about the near future. Diana Buttu, a political analyst in Ramallah and former legal adviser to the P.L.O., said it was not clear whether the Central Election Commission would call new elections. ''They will do so only if they decide the call is legal,'' she said.
        ''The president can resign and there will be new elections for that job,'' she added, but only the legislature can dissolve itself short of its mandated four-year term.
        Mr. Abbas ''sees the problem from the lens of international pressure, but that's not how the Palestinian street will perceive it,'' Ms. Buttu said. Mr. Abbas wants to end the international boycott through a unity government or a technocratic government, or failing that, if necessary, getting rid of Hamas entirely. But, she said, ''the Palestinians want to get rid of the boycott and think that Hamas never had a chance to rule and that Abu Mazen could have worked with Hamas to lift the boycott.''
        Mr. Abbas's decision found quick support from the White House and other Western governments. Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, who has begun a tour of the Middle East in Turkey and Egypt, called the move ''a strong sign that the Palestinian president is seeking a way out of the deadlock in the peace process.''
      