
        Leonard M. Greene, an inventor who developed an instrument to warn pilots when their planes were about to stall and who sold more than half a million of the devices over six decades, died Nov. 30. He was 88 and lived in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
        The cause was complications from lung cancer, said his daughter Bonnie Le Var.
        Mr. Greene founded Safe Flight Instrument, based in White Plains, in 1946. The company employs about 130 today, is still family-owned and is run by his son Randall A. Greene.
        Leonard Greene also founded and financed the Institute for SocioEconomic Studies, a small policy research organization in White Plains that helped advance his ideas on welfare reform, health care, tax reform and -- after Mr. Greene's son, Donald F. Greene, was killed aboard United Airlines Flight 93 on Sept. 11, 2001 -- foreign affairs.
        Mr. Greene was also a co-founder of the Corporate Angel Network, an organization that arranges free rides aboard corporate planes for cancer patients traveling for treatment.
        He held more than 200 patents, according to Allan Ostergren, the director of the SocioEconomic Studies institute and a friend. Mr. Ostergren recalled that in meetings Mr. Greene would often fall silent as he pondered a problem. ''Nobody would dare ask if he was still there,'' Mr. Ostergren said. ''It could signal the end of the meeting or the beginning of real business. Then he'd start talking again.''
        Mr. Greene's political and social views defied label, Mr. Ostergren said. ''He didn't consider himself a Republican or Democrat, conservative or liberal,'' he said, but searched for practical solutions to problems that intrigued him. He advocated a national tax rebate, for instance -- $12,000 for any family of four, regardless of income -- to alleviate poverty.
        Leonard Michael Greene was born in New York City on June 8, 1918. He earned bachelor's and master's degrees from the City College of New York and later studied at the Guggenheim School of Aeronautics at New York University. He was a student of aerodynamics and an engineering test pilot for Grumman before founding his company.
        The device Mr. Greene invented sounds an alert when an airplane is in danger of not having the lift needed to stay aloft, so that the pilot can take corrective action. It has become standard equipment on aircraft, small and large, and has helped reduce the number of accidents attributable to stalls.
        Ms. Le Var said that as a young man her father witnessed a small plane crash after a stall and went to work developing the device.
        Mr. Greene's first marriage, to Beverly Kaufman, with whom he had three children, ended in divorce. He adopted the four children of his second wife, Phyllis Saks, with whom he had another child. After his second wife's death, Mr. Greene married the former Joyce Teck. That marriage ended in divorce.
        In addition to Ms. Le Var, of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., and Randall Greene, of Greenwich, Conn., Mr. Greene is survived by four other sons, Douglas F., of Cortez, Colo.; Charles F., of Novato, Calif.; Stephen F., of Ludlow, Vt.; and Terry, of Somerville, Mass.; another daughter, Laurie Baldwin, of Kalispell, Mont.; four stepchildren; and many grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
      