
        A summary of the top stories in Russian newspapers on Friday.
        TOP STORIES
        GAZETA
        LIBERALS MORE DANGEROUS THAN NATIONALISTS: The Russian Interior Ministry said it would deploy about 8,500 police officers and national guard troops during Saturday's planned protests by the liberal opposition, more than were used during nationalist protests in November. Opposition leaders from The Other Russia announced on Thursday that demonstrators would not defy a ban by City Hall on a planned march, but instead hold a series of small protests. Organizers, even the more radical, left-wing elements, insisted that no laws would be broken, but did not rule out the potential for provocations by the police during the protests.
        NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA
        RUSSIAN ENERGY POLITICS CONDEMNED: On the eve of a session of the Unified Government of Russia and Belarus set to take place today, Belarus's president, Aleksandr G. Lukashenko, received unexpected support from the United States. The State Department expressed its concern on Thursday over what it said was Russia's use of energy resources as a political tool against Belarus. Russia announced a price increase on exports of oil to Belarus to take effect on Jan. 1, 2007. The newspaper wrote that the increase could seriously devaluate the Belarusian ruble.
        DATE OF PUTIN'S DEPARTURE ANNOUNCED: The head of Russia's Central Elections Commission on Thursday announced the date of Russia's next presidential election, halting debate, the newspaper said, on whether President Vladimir V. Putin should remain in office for a third term. The election will be held on March 9, 2008, allowing for the presidential campaigns to begin shortly after campaigning for parliamentary elections ends on Dec. 2, 2007. Now, only the start of World War III or an aggravation of Russia's internal socio-political situation could extend Mr. Putin's term in office, said a Kremlin advisor, Gleb Pavlovsky,
        KOMMERSANT
        POLL SHOWS VOTER SUPPORT FOR POTENTIAL SUCCESSORS: If presidential elections were held this weekend in Russia, the main contenders would be the current candidates to succeed President Putin, according to a survey by the Levada Center. The survey found that 38 percent of the electorate would vote for Dmitry Medvedev, the first deputy prime minister, while 23 percent would vote for the defense minister, Sergei B. Ivanov. While neither candidate surpassed the 50 percent threshold necessary for electoral legitimacy, public support for them has increased markedly since a similar poll was taken in October.
        ANTI-IMMIGRANT LEADER FACES CHARGES: Prosecutors leveled criminal charges on Thursday against the leader of the nationalist Movement Against Illegal Immigration for his suspected role in provoking interethnic tensions during anti-Chechen riots in the Karelian city of Kondopoga in late August and early September. According to prosecutors, Aleksandr Potkin, known by his pseudonym, Belov, came to Kondopoga after a fight between Chechens and ethnic Russians left two of the Russians dead. There, he was caught on television using degrading and hateful speech directed at certain nationalist groups. The prosecutors emphasized that Mr. Potkin was not suspected of organizing the riots.
        VREMYA NOVOSTEI
        NO CENSURE FOR CONTROVERSIAL ENVIRONMENTAL OFFICIAL: The minister of environmental resources on Thursday rejected a call by Sergei Sai, the head of Russia's environmental watch dog, to censure and possibly fire Oleg Mitvol, Mr. Sai's controversial deputy, according to the newspaper. Mr. Mitvol has gained prominence recently for several high-profile attacks on foreign companies for so-called infractions of Russian environmental law. In a letter to the minister, Mr. Sai accused Mr. Mitvol of ineffectively carrying out his duties. Meanwhile, just last week the environmental resources minister announced plans to take disciplinary action against Mr. Sai for the same reason.
        IZVESTIA
        RUSSIA UNVEILS NEW MISSILE SYSTEM: President Putin, along with Defense Secretary Ivanov, inspected the Russian military's new mobile intercontinental missile launcher, the Topol-M, on Thursday. From any location, the one-of-a-kind launching complex can fire missiles with state-of-the-art navigation systems capable of outmaneuvering any functional antiballistic missile system in the world today. Upon hearing about the new weapon system, according to Mr. Ivanov, President Putin immediately wanted to make a personal assessment.
      