
        A former fugitive who shot and killed one state trooper and wounded two others during a five-month flight that set off the most expensive manhunt in New York's history was sentenced on Tuesday to life in prison -- but not until after he made a last-minute bid to withdraw his guilty pleas.
        Ralph Phillips, who became nationally known by his nickname, Bucky, after his escape from a jail outside Buffalo in April, was sentenced in State Supreme Court by Justice Richard C. Kloch to life without the possibility of parole for killing Trooper Joseph A. Longobardo during a gun battle in rural Chautauqua County on Aug. 31.
        Like many stages in Mr. Phillips's evolution from nationally known fugitive to jailed killer, Tuesday brought its share of dramatic moments: Mr. Phillips tried to reverse his pleas, prosecutors revealed details of the gun battle in the woods that left a trooper dead, and they released a letter in which Mr. Phillips, then on the loose, discussed his need for more powerful weapons.
        On Nov. 30, Mr. Phillips pleaded guilty to shooting Trooper Longobardo and Trooper Donald Baker Jr. with a .308-caliber semiautomatic rifle near the home of his former companion, with whom police said he sought refuge during the manhunt. One bullet struck Trooper Longobardo in the thigh, severing an artery. He died on Sept. 3.
        On Tuesday, in front of a courtroom filled to standing-room capacity with state troopers and family members of Troopers Longobardo and Baker, Mr. Phillips asked the judge to allow him to vacate his guilty plea and to fire his court-appointed lawyer, Richard W. Rich Jr.
        Mr. Phillips said the killing was unintentional and called his original plea ''a lie'' meant to protect family members who were facing charges stemming from his flight.
        ''I'd like to apologize to the families, the families of Trooper Baker and Trooper Longobardo,'' Mr. Phillips said in explaining his attempt to withdraw his guilty plea. ''I never meant to kill anyone.''
        He said he did not realize that the two men were police officers, believing them to be bounty hunters. At the time of the August attack, Mr. Phillips was considered the prime suspect in the June shooting of a trooper during a traffic stop.
        ''They were hiding in the brush, crouched down -- they were in full camouflage,'' Mr. Phillips said of Troopers Longobardo and Baker, members of the elite Mobile Response Team. ''I was going to humiliate them, tie them up with duct tape and call 911 to come get them.''
        Prosecutors said the evidence showed that Mr. Phillips fired first, from about 40 feet away, striking Trooper Baker. The Chautauqua County district attorney, David Foley, said Trooper Longobardo yelled, ''Get down!'' then fired at Mr. Phillips, who retreated a few yards and shot back.
        The judge rejected Mr. Phillips's request to change his plea, pointing out that he pleaded ''very guilty'' in Elmira hours before his Nov. 29 plea in Chautauqua County, then ''guilty as hell'' a day later in Buffalo, where he admitted to escaping from jail.
        ''You know who you humiliated? Yourself,'' Justice Kloch said. ''The truth is, Trooper Longobardo is loved. He'll be remembered.'' The judge added: ''Maybe there will be a law named after him some day that puts people who kill police officers to death. You'll be forgotten. In a few weeks, you'll be irrelevant.''
        As part of the deal, prosecutors agreed to drop a charge of hindering prosecution against Mr. Phillips's former companion, Kasey Crowe, and child-endangerment and resisting arrest counts against their daughter, Patrina Gloss, also known as Patrina Wright.
        The wives of Troopers Longobardo and Baker attended the sentencing, but declined to comment.
        Calling Mr. Phillips ''a despicable person,'' State Police Superintendent Wayne E. Bennett said the defendant -- who told police transporting him after his guilty pleas that he would attempt to escape from state prison -- looked at him on his way out of the courtroom and said, ''I'll be back.''
        ''I guess he must be an Arnold Schwarzenegger fan,'' Superintendent Bennett said. ''He showed his true colors.''
        Disputing Mr. Phillips's assertion that he did not intend to hurt anyone, Mr. Foley produced a copy of a letter he said Mr. Phillips wrote more than two months before the fatal shootout and addressed to an acquaintance who was still incarcerated.
        ''Right now I'm searchin for better weapons,'' read the letter, which was dated June 27, 17 days after the trooper at the traffic stop was shot. ''The ones I have are fine, but I want a .308 with a scope and maybe a .45 pistol. Can't be having these folks walkin away after I put it to em.''
        Following Trooper Longobardo's death, the F.B.I. put Mr. Phillips, who is 44 and was serving time for a parole violation when he escaped, on its 10 Most Wanted list.
        The judge also sentenced Mr. Phillips, who police say roamed the upstate area during his time on the run, returning regularly to his native Chautauqua County, to an additional term of 40 years to life for shooting Trooper Baker.
        Later Tuesday, in Buffalo, Mr. Phillips received an additional 25 years to life for the jailbreak, with the same judge again refusing the defendant's request to withdraw his guilty plea.
      