
        With one more week of holiday shopping, why not think small? While none of these diminutive bonus-round items will break the bank, each in its own way is a little nugget of luxury and, for at least a moment, just may make you feel rich.
        1. Cute, bright card cases by Goyard come in six colors ($380 to $495, at Bergdorf Goodman).
        2. Super-design at your fingertips: the Eames La Chaise, faithfully created in miniature (5 1/2 inches by 9 3/4 inches by 5 1/2 inches) for palm-size lounging ($220 at www.momastore.org. ).
        3. Links of London's limited-edition silken cord and silver bracelet evokes memories of summer camp lanyards -- and 20 percent of the proceeds are donated to New Yorkers for Children (in pink, blue or black, $170 at www.linksoflondon.com).
        4. Gorgeous hand-milled soaps by Fresh, coveted by fashion and beauty editors, are available to noninsiders, too.($13.50 each at www.fresh.com).
        5. A 14-karat gold-plated harmony ball teething ring with soothing chime is perfect for big and little babies; adults can wear it on a leather cord as a necklace ($140 for gold, $80 for sterling silver at www.thisisauto.com).
        6. Serge Lutens is the ultimate lipstick, in six luscious neutral hues. It is the season's handbag trophy; as consolation for the high price ($75 each at www.barneys.com), those tiny tubes are refillable ($55).
        7. At Stila, a Color Festival velvet fuchsia-lined holiday boxed set fans open to reveal a limited-edition collection of eye, cheek and lip color ($58 at www.stilacosmetics.com).
        8. The Daisy Mini Party Cake from Vosges Chocolate is a confectionary bauble constructed of lemon-zest poundcake, fresh strawberry mousse and white chocolate ganache, festooned with rose petals ($35 at www.vosgeschocolate.com).
        9. The Molton Brown air constellation packs seven single-wick candelas in a shallow hatbox ($90 for a set of seven at www.moltonbrown.com).
        10. Malin & Goetz Replenishing Face Serum not only protects and moisturizes winter-weary faces but can also smooth away hangnails and, best of all, take static out of hair without making it oily ($65 at www.malinandgoetz.com).
        11. For a smooth shave, C. O. Bigelow Premium Shave Cream with eucalyptus oil, comes in a green aluminum tube ($10 at Bath and Body Works stores).  PULSE
      