
        SEVEN days a week, a mustachioed, 47-year-old Dominican named Pedro Reyes sells fruits and vegetables in front of Bonhita's Barber Shop, on a block of West 137th Street that slopes gently toward Riverside Park. Starting at 8 a.m., Mr. Reyes positions milk crates and cardboard boxes full of waxen limes, bright tomatoes and bulbous calabaza, or squash, on the sidewalk. When a favorite song plays on the radio sitting nearby, he breaks into salsa moves with an invisible partner.
        Mr. Reyes, who is widely known as Piri, calls his business the Valle Encantado Fruteria -- the Enchanted Valley Fruit Shop. But food is not all that he peddles. For $60, he will drive you to the airport in his battered white van. For negotiable rates, he does deliveries and moving. And for a $25 commission, he will find you a bare-bones room to rent in Harlem or neighboring Hamilton Heights.
        That last sideline may be Mr. Reyes's biggest. Over the last decade, he says, he has placed hundreds of $100-a-week boarders in the apartments of mostly older single women from Puerto Rico or the Dominican Republic. In a town full of heart-stopping rents and behemoth real estate firms, Mr. Reyes is a little broker for the little guy.
        ''People used to say, 'Hey, if you know someone who has a room, let me know,' '' he said the other day, recalling the early days of his sidewalk real estate venture as he sliced into a watermelon in front of his produce stand. In the beginning, his only clients were other Spanish speakers seeking rooms. But as gentrification crept farther north and Manhattan's apartment vacancy rate sank to less than 1 percent, Mr. Reyes's services, known only by word of mouth, have been sought by all sorts of people.
        ''Everyone comes to me,'' he said. ''Boxers. Dancers. Students. People who have some education, because they definitely have to have a job to pay for the room every week. But it's less expensive than getting a whole apartment.''
        The women who rent out rooms, Mr. Reyes said, are usually trying to alleviate their own financial burdens in a neighborhood where many have lived for 25 or 30 years.
        The rooms come with rules attached. Overnight guests are usually prohibited, in part because the landladies are frequently staunch Roman Catholics. Although tenants are not necessarily confined to their bedrooms and may be allowed to hang out in the living rooms, kitchen privileges are sometimes restricted or forbidden outright. And male tenants are often preferred to females.
        ''Men shower, put on their clothes and hit the street, but women always want to be at home,'' Mr. Reyes said. His cadre of small-time landlords, he explained, like their daytime privacy.
        Lately, Mr. Reyes's clientele has expanded to include a number of young jazz musicians, people like Josh Benko, a 33-year-old alto saxophonist who was going through a divorce last year and moved out of his apartment in Astoria, Queens. Mr. Benko found a room in an apartment on West 137th Street, but the landlady had a troublesome teenage grandson whose activities sometimes brought the police to the apartment door.
        Enter Mr. Reyes, whom Mr. Benko had met on the street.
        Mr. Reyes scouted out a potential room in the apartment of a woman who, according to the customary mode of address, was called Miss Ramona. The place was clean and had no other boarders, which appealed to Mr. Benko. But he said: ''Miss Ramona was very Catholic. So no women allowed, which is a drag.''
        AFTER returning to Mr. Reyes in search of a landlady offering a little more flexibility, he was introduced to Miss Maria, who offered a room equipped with the standard mattress, dresser and small fridge, and was less concerned about whether he brought his girlfriend home with him at 5 a.m. after a gig downtown.
        ''Since then, I've hooked up six or seven people through Piri,'' Mr. Benko said the other day as he sat on a Japanese mat in his sparsely decorated room, rolling cigarettes and pouring green tea. ''He knows the scene all through the neighborhood. There are these beautiful old New York apartments, just with linoleum stuck on the floors.''
        One person Mr. Benko referred to Mr. Reyes was a 20-year-old jazz drummer named Keith Balla, who, after moving to New York from Texas in October, spent a month sleeping on other people's couches. Thanks to Mr. Reyes, Mr. Balla now lives with a Dominican couple in their 50s, in whose apartment he quickly grew accustomed to the smell of stewed chicken emanating from the kitchen and the sound of merengue blasting on the street.
        Another friend of Mr. Benko's, a French jazz drummer named Elisabeth Keledjian, used his help in August in securing a 75-square-foot room in the apartment of Louisa Solis, 64. ''When she saw me come with my drums, she was like, 'What is this?' '' Ms. Keledjian recalled. ''Then she cleared out a closet for them in the hall.''
        Ms. Solis, in turn, said she was glad to offer the extra closet to Ms. Keledjian, of whom she quickly grew fond. ''She's a sincere girl, and she speaks some Spanish,'' Ms. Solis said. ''Having the extra rent money is a separate bonus.''
        Like any good real estate broker, Mr. Reyes constantly seeks to refresh his supply. He has even sought to rent out rooms in the apartments of three women whom he identifies as his girlfriends: Ada on West 139th Street, Maria on West 136th and Regina on West 135th.
        But unlike many other brokers, Mr. Reyes is not averse to serving what may the lowest rung on the Manhattan real estate ladder. ''It's getting more expensive in this city every day,'' he said. ''But I'm helping people. I have connections. From 125th Street to 160th Street, I know everybody.''
        URBAN TACTICS
      