
        We are disappointed that the Supreme Court has upheld a defendant's conviction even though spectators at his trial put prejudicial material in sight of the jury. Fortunately, the court made clear that its ruling this week was based only on the unusual way the issue was raised, and that it was not deciding when this kind of politicking from the audience violated the Constitution. The decision should prompt courts to think about how to ensure that courtroom atmosphere does not deprive defendants of a fair trial.
        At Mathew Musladin's murder trial in California, the dead man's family sat in the front of the spectators' gallery wearing buttons with their relative's picture. The key issue at trial was which of the two men was the aggressor in a fight, and the photographs were essentially an argument that the deceased was the innocent victim.
        Mr. Musladin was convicted in state court, but a federal appeals court overturned his conviction. A federal court can do this only if it finds that a state court violated ''clearly established federal law.'' In this case, the appeals court decided the state court had, since the Supreme Court had ruled in an analogous case that forcing a defendant to stand trial in prison garb sent a message of guilt to the jury and thus violated his right to a fair trial.
        The Supreme Court upheld Mr. Musladin's conviction, reversing the appeals court. It ruled that the court was wrong about there being ''clearly established federal law'' in this area. It decided, not all that convincingly, that the prison garb case was different from Mr. Musladin's case because the government, not private citizens, was sending the prejudicial message.
        The Supreme Court emphasized that it was not deciding whether photographs of the kind worn at Mr. Musladin's trial violated the Constitution; that remains an open question. Justice Anthony Kennedy, writing separately, advised courts to consider when spectators infringe on a defendant's fair-trial rights.
        Justice Kennedy is right. A victim's family has every right to attend a trial. But judges must ensure that criminal defendants are judged on the evidence, and nothing more. If Mr. Musladin's case is at all typical, it suggests that many courts do not have clear, uniform rules about what sort of spectator actions are impermissible. Court systems around the country should take Justice Kennedy's advice and set appropriate standards that preserve defendants' right to a fair trial.
        Editorial
      