
        The excellently titled but narrowly conceived ''Wunderground: Providence, 1995 to the Present,'' at the Rhode Island School of Design Museum, scratches the surface of an immensely rich cultural moment. The show, although rather amateurish, demonstrates the ease with which ephemera sometimes trumps art.
        Your hair may stand on end while you navigate the three galleries that are papered floor to ceiling with several hundred posters and fliers generated for events in Providence's art/music underground. The display attests to the graphic gifts of cartoonists and artists like Brian Chippendale, Mat Brinkman, Xander Marro, Erin Rosenthal and others.
        Many trained as printmakers at RISD and then helped found or expand Fort Thunder, a legendary live-work-performance space in a complex of 19th-century mill buildings in the Olneyville section of Providence.
        This part of the exhibition staves off the usual you-had-to-be-there regrets with sheer visual ferociousness, information overload and the chance to listen (through headsets) to recordings of live performances by sundry noise bands, experimental musicians and folk singers. With a chair, a playlist and access to the forward button, I could have spent days here listening.
        Fort Thunder became the site of clearly creative high times -- noise band performances, collective living and art-making, and improvised Collyer Brothers-like environments (some featured in Nest magazine). But it was also a tale of woe in the form of harassment, eviction and real estate development. (Fort Thunder was demolished to make way for a shopping center in 2002.)
        The New York art world got an inkling of the goings-on in Providence at the 2002 Whitney Biennial, which included a memorable sound-light-and-video environment populated by a tribe of mannequins in brightly knitted gear -- all by Forcefield, a four-person collaborative that started at Fort Thunder.
        Yet there is nothing as powerful as Forcefield's Whitney debut in the second half of the RISD show: a gallery devoted to the large sculptures and multimedia installations made mostly by Fort Thunder artists who still reside in Providence. The display resembles nothing so much as generic leftovers from long-ago Whitney Biennials.
        The works in this section do little to confirm the view, prevalent in the show's otherwise excellent catalog, that working collectively outside New York guarantees greater purity or originality. Clearly, in this case, you had to be there.
        There is some vitality in the details, especially the vituperative signs and cartoons lining ''Home on the Run,'' a little house by Mr. Chippendale, who has been evicted from three domiciles in Providence. (He recently exhibited a similar work at D'Amelio Terras in Manhattan.) There is energy, too, in the hallucinatory video that forms part of Leif Goldberg's otherwise uninspired installation.
        Jungil Hong's ''Supermarket Spirit Ship,'' an enormous lantern made from shopping bags, has a shabby recycled exquisiteness -- but such fragile do-it-yourself beauty is also familiar. Jim Drain, who with Mr. Chippendale was part of Forcefield, has incorporated a Northwest Coast Indian totem from the museum's collection in an installation; it is a shortcut that falls short of his usual tribal psychedelic effect.
        Outside the exhibition proper a program called ''Videos in Progress'' plays on a monitor, and it offers some of the harum-scarum energy of the poster-lined galleries. Especially worth watching are two by Johanna Dery and a barrage of still images titled ''0106'' by Ms. Marro and Mr. Brinkman. The images document their Fort-Thunder-like collective living spaces, the Dirt Palace and Hilarious Attic.
        The show was organized by the museum's curator of contemporary art, Judith Tannenbaum, working valiantly on what seems to have been a shoestring. It should serve as inspiration for a more thoroughgoing survey, one that would examine the Providence scene and aesthetic in greater detail and against a broader context of developments across the country. There certainly should be more attention paid to the comics, zines and animations produced by the Providence cartoonists, and maybe labels on those concert posters.
        Certain Fort Thunder artists are missing, including Ara Peterson, another Forcefield member. Attention could be paid to artists who developed work outside or after the original Fort Thunder nucleus, but were undoubtedly touched by it, including the collective Paper Rad and the talented graphic artist Matt Leines.
        Another product of the Providence/RISD scene is Ryan Trecartin, a recent graduate of the school whose brilliant senior-year film, ''A Family Finds Entertainment,'' may be the apotheosis of Fort Thunder's collage-cartoon aesthetic. It was screened at the 2006 Whitney Biennial on a small monitor near the elevator and was not widely noticed. Given a room of its own, it could have had as much impact as the 2002 Forcefield onslaught.
        ''Wunderground: Providence, 1995 to the Present'' continues through Jan. 7 at the Rhode Island School of Design Museum of Art, 224 Benefit Street, Providence, (401) 454-6500.
        ART REVIEW
      