
        When Kathy Riedlinger first stepped into the devastated hulk that would become her middle and high school after Hurricane Katrina blew apart New Orleans, it was a disaster zone of mold and ruin, 164,000 square feet of hurt with 182 broken windows.
        When students began school there in August, it had no telephone, no gym, no Internet service, no cafeteria, no water fountains, no textbooks.
        Now some things are better (a few phones, Internet, textbooks), some are still getting there (still no cafeteria or water fountains, two boys' and two girls' bathrooms for 683 students). But nothing is normal in a school on two campuses where 60 percent of the students are still displaced from the homes they had lived in before Katrina.
        Ms. Riedlinger, the principal of the Lusher Charter School, came to Nyack last week in search of music -- specifically a tribute to New Orleans that raised close to $8,000 for musical instruments to replace those destroyed by the storm. But she came away with something as important -- the recognition, for a night at least, that people still remembered, still cared, still knew how much needed to be done 15 months after Katrina blew her world to bits.
        Being an educator in New Orleans, a place where dysfunctional schools have long been the rule, has never been easy. But compound a failing school system with a city still recovering from the storm, and you have the challenge of a lifetime. That's what Ms. Riedlinger faced. She got permission from Louisiana officials to operate as a charter school, managed to reopen an elementary and middle school with 875 children last January and the new combined high school and middle school in August. Since then, it's been a matter of looking for money -- a gift here, a grant there -- and doing jobs a piece at a time. It is similar to crawling, then walking toward a school day that most other people take for granted.
        So when about 150 people showed up for readings, music and photographs celebrating New Orleans at the new Riverspace arts center in Nyack, they were not going to solve all her problems. That won't happen for a decade or more.
        But maybe they could solve a few. The event got its start when Suzie Devoe, a local actress, got the idea from a benefit she attended in Manhattan. She asked a Nyack resident, Rob Brown, who was working in New Orleans, for places to support. He mentioned Lusher, one of the more lauded educational efforts in New Orleans. She took the idea to the fledgling Riverspace arts group. Artists like the actress Kathleen Chalfant and the director Jonathan Demme were among those who agreed to participate.
        THERE were readings about New Orleans from Mark Twain, Tennessee Williams, Truman Capote and others. There were photographs of the city, including some from Arnold Roufa, a retired doctor who attended the school that now houses the Lusher upper school. There was a showing of segments of a documentary on New Orleans being filmed by Mr. Demme.
        There was a sweet logic to it all. Nyack isn't New Orleans. What is? But it's happily eccentric, full of artists, proudly diverse -- racially and economically -- and on the water. Not a bad match.
        Ms. Riedlinger said that any euphoria about survival and homecoming are long gone from New Orleans. People are resigned to a long, slow comeback in which some parts of the city may never come back at all.
        ''Kids can't wait 5 to 10 years,'' she said. ''So if we have to accept how slow some things will be, we have to have a sense of urgency, too. They only go to school once. You can't come back in 10 years and do what you can't do now.''
        But if you have to be patient about some things, you can't be about others.
        ''We need to have a commitment not just to give them what they would get ordinarily, but a commitment greater than that because of all the things they're dealing with,'' Ms. Riedlinger said.
        You can't save a city in a night, and $8,000 goes only so far when a baritone sax can cost $2,500. The lesson goes further.
        So, as the narrator announced, after a reading from the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. ended the evening: ''There is still much to be done in the rebuilding of the Gulf Coast. Do not forget. Thank you for your help. Keep us in your thoughts and prayers. Good night.''
        OUR TOWNS E-mail: peappl@nytimes.com
      