
        FROZEN OUT
        The News -- William Jefferson, the Democratic representative whose district covers New Orleans and some of its suburbs, was denied his former seat on the influential House Ways and Means Committee by incoming Speaker Nancy Pelosi. He was re-elected in a runoff on Dec. 9.
        Behind the News -- For Democrats, having regained control of the House in part by emphasizing ethics problems of Republicans, Mr. Jefferson presented a difficult test case. He has denied wrongdoing, and has not been charged with a crime. But the F.B.I. says its agents found $90,000 in bribe money in Mr. Jefferson's freezer, and two of his associates have pleaded guilty to charges of bribery and conspiracy. Last June, the House removed Mr. Jefferson from the committee, and having pledged to clean up Capitol Hill, Ms. Pelosi declined last week to return him to his post. The investigation continues.
        VOTED OUT
        The News -- A well-known, seven-term Republican representative from Texas, Henry Bonilla (above right), was defeated last week by former Representative Ciro D. Rodriguez in the final runoff election of 2006. The reversal of fortune for the G.O.P. in the House is complete. In the outgoing Congress, they held a 232-203 majority; next year, they would be outnumbered 233-202, including independents who are allied with Democrats. (A Florida race is still being contested.)
        Behind the News -- Mr. Bonilla may have been the victim of a long dispute over redrawn Congressional districts engineered by Republican state legislators. The Supreme Court found that the new maps diluted the Hispanic vote to help Mr. Bonilla. (The rest of the redistricting was deemed constitutional.) Although Mr. Bonilla is himself Hispanic, in general that bloc tends to vote Democratic. The revised 23rd District raised the Hispanic voting-age population from 51 to 61 percent of the total, which appears to have given an edge to Mr. Rodriguez. The 23rd is sparsely settled but covers about one-fifth of the state's land mass.
        CONSPIRACIES OUT
        The News -- A three-year police inquiry into the 1997 death of Diana, Princess of Wales, was released. The report, weighing in at 832 pages, said there was no conspiracy to kill any of the occupants of the wrecked car. Rather, the inquiry concluded it was an accident. Also dead: the driver, Henri Paul, and Diana's companion, Emad Mohamed (Dodi) al-Fayed.
        Behind the News -- Conspiracy theories have blossomed in the years since the wreck. The report was a blow to Mr. Fayed's father, Mohamed al-Fayed (above), who has said that the British royal family and British security services wanted Diana killed so that she would not marry Dodi and have children with him. Mohamed al-Fayed denounced Lord Stevens of Kirkwhelpington, the leader of the inquiry, as ''a mental case'' and ''a tool for the establishment and the royal family and intelligence.'' Despite the report's firm conclusions, the case is far from over. It will be the basis for a formal inquest into the deaths, set to begin next year.
        STILL IN THE PICTURE
        The News -- Two University of South Carolina fraternity brothers, who are shown in the film ''Borat'' making racist and misogynist remarks, lost their petition for a court order to delete those scenes and block the DVD release of the movie.
        Behind the News -- The students say they thought they would appear in a foreign documentary that would not be screened in the United States. They turned out to be boorish co-stars of a top-grossing film, ''Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan.'' The pair, along with a third classmate who did not participate in the suit, invite Borat, a fictional television journalist played by Sacha Baron Cohen, into their R.V. Over plenty of drinks, they hold forth on reinstituting slavery and disrespecting women. Their lawyer said the scenes cost one student a job at a large corporation and another a prestigious internship, and made both of them objects of humiliation and ridicule. Others in the film have said they, too, were duped into participating.  THE WEEK
      