
        It's her! Wait, who's she with? Wait -- not him? With him?!?
        Probably the juiciest power lunch of the week unfolded at the Four Seasons yesterday as Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton sized up her 2008 presidential chances with none other than the Republican power broker Alfonse M. D'Amato, with former Mayor Edward I. Koch merrily riding shotgun.
        Mr. D'Amato, the former senator from New York, described himself in an interview yesterday as a big, big fan of hers, (though he will be supporting a Republican in 2008), and said he told her not to lose a minute's sleep over her possible Democratic rival -- ''what's-his-name, Obama.'' The three dine together once or twice a year, with each taking a turn at picking up the check. (Mrs. Clinton, who had the $56 Dover sole, paid yesterday, so the White House consultation did come at a price, something north of $250.)
        Over salad, Nantucket Bay scallops and a plate of heavenly truffles (gratis), Mr. D'Amato and Mr. Koch said they analyzed the 2008 field, and both predicted that Senator John McCain would be the Republican nominee and that former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani would be his running mate.
        Mr. Koch said he told Mrs. Clinton that she would triumph over that ticket, while Mr. D'Amato, a friend of both men, would not reveal how he rated her chances.
        ''My Republican colleagues would do well to take notice of a very focused, energetic, organized, articulate, bright senator who, if she does run for president, should be taken as a very, very serious candidate,'' Mr. D'Amato said. ''Some people say she can't win. Well, some people also said the Republicans wouldn't lose the Senate -- and we did. Republicans would make a terrible mistake underestimating her.''
        Mr. D'Amato also made it clear at the lunch that he believed Mrs. Clinton would win the Democratic nomination if she sought it, and that her chief rival of late, Senator Barack Obama of Illinois, would wilt under media scrutiny.
        ''You always have a flavor-of-the-month candidate -- at one point it was Governor Warner of Virginia, now it's what's-his-name, Obama -- but that's not going to hold up to a campaign by Senator Clinton,'' Mr. D'Amato said. ''Though they may make a good one-two.''
        The two men analyzed the Republican field and the dynamics of the race, they said, while Senator Clinton mostly listened, and avoided tipping her hand.
        ''She's a marvelous listener, and Al is a wonderful talker,'' Mr. Koch said. ''It was a match made in heaven. I sat on the sidelines, waving to people who were waving at us.''
        Mr. D'Amato said he had not picked a Republican favorite, but said Senator McCain looked like the right horse, assuming that his age (70) and health (past bouts with skin cancer) do not hobble him.
        ''Health and age will certainly be raised. I hope his people don't think I'm raising it, but it will be in the minds of every person who will cover him,'' Mr. D'Amato said. Mr. Koch, who often supports Republicans, said he strongly supported a Clinton candidacy and believed she would beat any Republican.
        Mrs. Clinton has been having similar chit-chats at other meals and meetings in recent weeks, including one on Wednesday night in Washington with former advisers to her husband, including James Carville and Paul Begala.
        Asked about yesterday's lunch, Howard Wolfson, an adviser to Mrs. Clinton, said she ''always appreciates the opportunity to sit down with the mayor and the senator.''
        The restaurant's Grill Room, usually filled with power lunchers, where Vernon Jordan and Sanford Weill were among the patrons yesterday, began buzzing madly when Mrs. Clinton walked in around 1, the two men said, and about 25 people came by to say hello as she was preparing to leave at 3.
        ''It was like the Second Coming of Christ,'' said Julian Niccolini, the co-owner.
        Not everyone was mad for Herself. One patron noticed that Mr. Niccolini was wearing a Hillary button, and was moved to comment. ''The customer said, 'What are you, a communist?' '' Mr. Niccolini said. ''I said I was a feminist, get lost.''
      