
        The Metropolitan Transportation Authority inspector general, responsible for investigating fraud and abuse at the agency, abruptly resigned last month during an inquiry into anonymous accusations that he improperly promoted a subordinate with whom he had a romantic relationship, several state officials said yesterday.
        The inspector general, Matthew D. Sansverie, a former prosecutor who was appointed by Gov. George E. Pataki in 2000, resigned effective Nov. 14, according to Stephen Del Giacco, a spokesman for the New York State Office of the Inspector General. The state inspector general was conducting what Mr. Del Giacco called ''a preliminary inquiry'' into allegations of misconduct leveled against Mr. Sansverie in an anonymous letter.
        Mr. Sansverie denied wrongdoing last night in a brief interview. ''Nothing inappropriate happened,'' he said. He said he resigned because ''there was an election, there is going to be a new governor, and there's no possibility of reappointment as far as I can see.'' He added, ''It's time to move on.''
        Mr. Sansverie's office has come under scrutiny from critics who have said that he has failed to investigate corruption at the authority aggressively.
        The authority exercises tremendous power and employs more than 64,000 people. Last night, Mr. Sansverie vigorously defended his stewardship of the office.
        In recent weeks, Mr. Sansverie's name was removed from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's Inspector General's office Web site. The section headed ''Message from the IG'' is now under construction. No announcement of his resignation was made by Governor Pataki, who has not appointed a new inspector general. Mr. Del Giacco said Michael L. Boxer, the deputy state inspector general, has been named acting inspector general for the authority.
        A spokesman for Mr. Pataki did not return a call yesterday seeking comment on Mr. Sansverie's resignation.
        The anonymous letter to the state inspector general was received in September, Mr. Del Giacco said.
        One official said the letter also included accusations that Mr. Sansverie had extended his stay at a regional inspector general's conference in Florida to spend time with a companion. That official and several others spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the matter.
        Mr. Del Giacco said that the inquiry ended with Mr. Sansverie's resignation because the conduct he was accused of did not appear to be a crime. He said no conclusions were reached as to whether the accusations were true, and no formal report was prepared on the matter by the state inspector general, Dineen Riviezzo.
        ''In view of the nature of the allegations, which even if substantiated appeared to be in the realm of administrative misconduct, rather than criminal misconduct, the most serious consequence would have been his resignation,'' Mr. Del Giacco said.
      