
        THE Suffolk County representative on the Metropolitan Transportation Authority board wants a ban on the sale of alcoholic beverages on the authority's commuter trains and platforms. And the authority has agreed to consider that and more.
        Last Wednesday, a task force was created to consider passenger behavior -- including the purchase and consumption of alcohol -- on Metro-North and the Long Island Rail Road.
        On Dec. 6, the board member, Mitchell H. Pally, sought an immediate vote to ban the sale of alcohol by the authority, but at the suggestion of its chairman, Peter S. Kalikow, he agreed to the creation of the task force to study the issue, Tim O'Brien, an authority spokesman, said.
        Mr. Pally said the task force would deal with a variety of passenger issues, including drinking, the use of cellphones, cleanliness and behavior. It would also decide whether any changes it recommended would affect only the Long Island Rail Road or Metro-North as well. The report by the task force, which will include board members and railroad staff members, is expected by April.
        ''My call for the alcohol ban was the catalyst for doing this,'' Mr. Pally said in an interview. He said he opposed drinking on trains because ''we owe all of our customers a safe and secure ride, and I don't think that mixes with allowing people to drink on the train.''
        He said that the sale of alcoholic beverages brought in about $350,000 a year for the Long Island Rail Road, but added that it was ''not a lot of money considering'' the budget. The railroad's annual budget is about $1.3 billion.
        ''It's not a money issue, it's whether the state should continue to sell alcohol to people, a great majority of whom will drive afterwards,'' Mr. Pally said. ''It seems to be contradictory that the state passes strong drunk-driving laws and then sells alcohol to people who are getting off the train and into their cars.''
        In interviews at Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan, Long Island Rail Road commuters voiced almost universal opposition to the removal of bar carts from trains and platforms.
        ''I think it's silly,'' Jean C. Singer, 50, of Hempstead, said last week as she approached one of two adjacent bar carts between tracks 18 and 19. ''You can buy a beer anywhere and stick it in your pocketbook'' before boarding a train.
        Mrs. Singer, an assistant to the chief financial officer of a nonprofit agency in New York, said she saw ''no harm'' in someone having a drink on the train.
        ''I enjoy a cocktail,'' she said, noting that she orders a gin and tonic on her way home each evening. ''It's a one-hour commute, and I drink my cocktail and read a book. I'd rather have someone with a cocktail sitting next to me than someone on a cellphone.''
        Joseph A. DiSalvo, 52, of Plainview, said he understood concerns about ''people getting on who are rowdy and drunk, but I think it rarely happens.''
        ''Years ago they used to have bar cars on the trains in which people smoked and some got a little loud,'' he said, waiting for the 5:53 to Ronkonkoma. ''But for the most part I don't think there is any harm in it.''
        Elizabeth E. Mendoza, 34, of Bayside, asked why the authority should get rid of bar carts when commuters can buy beer in Penn Station itself.
        ''You're not going to stop people from drinking on the train,'' she said, holding a can of beer she had bought at the station.
        But Mr. Pally noted that drinking was prohibited on the city subways, which the M.T.A. also oversees.
        A ban on the railroad would be welcome news to Barbara F. Wolfe, 41, of Selden, who said she had seen ''people getting off the train totally inebriated'' or getting sick on the train or platform.
        Any move to ban alcohol sales in Connecticut on the Metro-North New Haven Line, which has bar carts at Grand Central Terminal as well as 10 bar cars on trains, would face resistance from the Connecticut Department of Transportation.
        Eugene Colonese, the rail administrator for the department, said the state was committed to bar car service and in fact planned to buy an unspecified number of new bar cars for the New Haven Line.
      