
        They were crimes of gruesome fascination, the serial killing of five prostitutes near a small town in eastern England that evoked comparisons with the unsolved murders of Jack the Ripper in Victorian London.
        But when Tom Stephens, 37, a supermarket worker and part-time taxi driver, was arrested Monday on suspicion of all five murders, the episode soon assumed more modern trappings: a tearful tabloid interview in which the suspect came close to forecasting his detention, and an Internet site on which the suspect nicknamed himself ''the Bishop.''
        Mr. Stephens was not immediately charged with the crimes after his arrest early Monday at the apartment where he lived alone in a modest complex in Trimley St. Martin, a village near the coastal city of Felixstowe in eastern England.
        It was the first arrest since the women's bodies were found, some of them near Trimley St. Martin itself. The police immediately began a painstaking search of the suspect's home for evidence and took away his car on a flatbed truck.
        Bizarrely, it was not, according to Mr. Stephens himself in an interview in the tabloid The Sunday Mirror, the first time the police had interviewed him or searched his home.
        Yet what seemed to have brought his arrest was that same interview, in which he described himself as a frequenter of prostitutes with close personal knowledge of the five dead women: Tania Nicol, 19; Gemma Adams, 25; Annette Nicholls, 29; Anneli Alderton, 24; and Paula Clennell, 24.
        The women were reported missing between Oct. 30 and Dec. 9. In a macabre procession, their naked bodies were found in secluded areas near villages south of Ipswich between Dec. 2 and Dec. 12.
        The case has riveted the nation, drawing Britons' attention to a little-known tale of drugs and vice in a provincial town where prostitutes ply their trade in the shadows of a soccer stadium -- often to feed additions to crack cocaine and heroin.
        Several of the dead women were mothers of young children. One, Ms. Alderton, was three months pregnant when she was strangled and her body left in a woodland. The bodies were found near the A14 highway running from Felixstowe to Ipswich.
        ''I'm a friend of all the girls,'' Mr. Stephens said in his lengthy interview with The Sunday Mirror, in which he said he had visited about 50 prostitutes in the past year, since his eight-year marriage broke down. ''I was closest to Tania. And Gemma as well. I was close to others as well. But I should have been there to look over them.''
        He went on: ''I don't have alibis for some of the times; actually, I'm not entirely sure I have tight alibis for any of the times. But I'm not worried about being charged. I'm innocent.''
        The interviewer reported that he had sobbed when he said the women had ''trusted me so much.''
        ''Gemma and Tania, the ones I was closest to, are the best-looking girls who do this in Ipswich,'' he said. ''In fact, they were probably the top five. Over time I have been involved with most of the girls. If you count, there are about 50 over the past year.
        ''From the police profiling, it does look like me -- white male between 25 and 40, knows the area, works strange hours. The bodies have got close to my house. If new information, coincidental information, crops up, I could get arrested. I know I am innocent, and I am completely confident it won't go as far as me being charged.''
        Sky News television quoted a woman who said she was a former prostitute and knew Mr. Stephens as saying that ''he looked after us,'' by driving them around to keep warm on cold nights and then returning to the streets of their trade.
        Newspapers have nicknamed the killer the Suffolk Strangler, after the county. In the 1970s and early '80s, the serial killing of 13 women in northern England earned the killer the title the Yorkshire Ripper. A man named Peter Sutcliffe was convicted of the murders.
        Monday's events began to unfold publicly about two hours after Mr. Stephens's arrest, when Detective Chief Superintendent Stewart Gull, who is leading the investigation, announced that an unidentified man ''has been arrested on the suspicion of murdering all five women.''
        By that time, Mr. Stephens's house had been cordoned off and neighbors began telling British reporters that they had seen him digging in his garden with a small trowel after moving into the area only three months earlier. He was described as a loner.
        Then, reporters discovered that a man closely resembling Mr. Stephens maintained a page on the MySpace networking Web site where he was shown posing with a can of custard powder and in front of a wall studded with pale stars. On the Web site, he listed his nickname as ''the Bishop'' and his interests as ''keeping fit, most types of day/night out.''
        He described himself as ''single,'' ''straight'' and ''white/caucasian,'' and said he had posted his details for ''dating, serious relationships and friends.'' The page listed his hero as the cartoon character Hong Kong Phooey. The man's last log-in on the page was listed as Oct. 27.
      