
        One month after a federal monitor accused him of trying to ''refute, rebut and bury'' information about a kickback scheme at New Jersey's troubled medical school, Dr. Bruce C. Vladeck, the school's interim president, withdrew as a candidate for the permanent president job.
        Dr. Vladeck, who oversaw the Medicare and Medicaid programs in the Clinton administration, was brought into the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in February, and has been credited with tightening accounting procedures and improving morale during the school's lingering financial scandals. Although he initially said he would not consider the permanent president's job, Dr. Vladeck later agreed to be considered and was said to be one of the 10 finalists being reviewed by the university's search committee.
        But the federal monitor investigating financial irregularities at the medical school said last month that Dr. Vladeck had misled investigators this fall by playing down evidence that the school was paying illegal kickbacks to cardiologists in return for referrals to the university hospital.
        In announcing his withdrawal from the search for a permanent president, Dr. Vladeck repeated his assertions that he had never sought to mislead the investigators, and said that time would vindicate him. But he acknowledged that the controversy had added to the distractions that were already complicating the difficult job of trying to lead the university.
        ''I've put a lot of energy into addressing those questions, and I don't want to put any more energy into it when there are other important things that need to be done,'' he said in an interview yesterday.
        Gov. Jon S. Corzine, who appointed Dr. Vladeck, said he was grateful for his service during a difficult time for the university. Mr. Corzine's spokesman, Anthony Coley, said Dr. Vladeck had the governor's ''complete confidence.''
        Dr. Vladeck is committed to stay until March at the position, which pays $525,000 per year, but he said he would stay on for a short while longer if the board needed him.
      