
        Nick Mangold, the Jets' starting center, lay belly down on the field in Minnesota like a bear rug. His injury on the Jets' second play from scrimmage last Sunday against the Vikings looked bad from any angle, especially the one his father, Vern, had from his seat in the family room of Mangold's prospective in-laws in Ohio.
        CBS, which was televising the game, took a commercial break, and as one advertisement bled into another, the thought occurred to Vern that perhaps the network was showing a lot of commercials to avoid having to televise his son being carted off in an ambulance.
        It was not like the 1996 movie ''Jerry Maguire,'' in which Cuba Gooding Jr.'s character, receiver Rod Tidwell, is hurt during a game, and his family, which is watching the telecast, phones Tidwell's agent at the stadium to find out the extent of the injury.
        Vern did not know anybody at the Metrodome to call. ''He was a nervous wreck,'' Therese Mangold, Vern's wife and Mangold's mother, said Tuesday by telephone.
        When at last the network returned to the game and showed Mangold walking off the field, Vern's relief was palpable.
        Mangold, who sustained a bruised hip when he collided with his teammate Leon Washington, returned for the Jets' next offensive series and did not draw any attention to himself after that, a sure sign he was performing well.
        After the game, Therese reached her son on his cellphone and asked about his physical well-being. He assured her that he was fine, then said, ''Mother, you worry too much.''
        Outsiders expressed concern at the start of the season about the Jets parting ways with the veteran Kevin Mawae, a six-time Pro Bowl center, and entrusting the line calls to Mangold, a rookie whom the team drafted in the first round, with the 29th pick over all.
        It proved so much needless heedfulness. A three-year starter at Ohio State, Mangold has made a seamless transition from Division I-A football to the National Football League. He is a big reason the Jets are 8-6 and in the thick of the playoff race heading into their game Monday night at Miami.
        ''He's never rattled,'' quarterback Chad Pennington said. ''Nothing overwhelms him, whether it's preparation, whether it's game time. He just takes it all in stride. It's pretty amazing as a rookie to be able to do that.''
        The 22-year-old Mangold has played as well as any rookie and better than most, including his linemate D'Brickashaw Ferguson, the No. 4 overall pick, who is having a solid season at left tackle. In 14 starts, Mangold has drawn only two penalties and has played every down except one in New England last month, which he missed after being poked in the eye.
        He is a deserving candidate for the offensive Rookie of the Year award, although Mangold is really the everyman of candidates: invisible in plain sight.
        Since The Associated Press began recognizing outstanding rookies in 1967, running backs have been the most honored (30), followed by receivers (7) and quarterbacks (2). A lineman has never won the award.
        ''I think it's hard to overstate how good a job Nick's done,'' said left guard Pete Kendall, an 11th-year veteran, adding, ''It's hard for even guys that don't play on the offensive line in this locker room to understand the difficulties of playing center, being a rookie and all that.''
        Kendall, who started 10 games at center last season after Mawae sustained a season-ending biceps injury, added, ''He's come in and, to me, he's played like he's been here before.''
        The transition has not been a snap. The shotgun exchange was the bane of Mangold's training camp. He struggled with it and ended up running a lot of punishment laps. ''He put the ball on the ground a couple of times,'' Coach Eric Mangini said. ''That fazed him and me.''
        Mangold is not easily knocked away from his normal state of equilibrium. ''I don't know that I can ever say Nick's been rattled,'' said his mother, Therese, whose stolidity Mangold seems to have inherited. ''Everything with him is nice and even-keeled.''
        It may not look like it, Mangold said, but every week is a struggle for him. ''It's one of those things where there's always something that you could do better,'' he said.
        He has learned a lot from Kendall about managing his assignments and other people's expectations. ''He has taught me about just being your own player,'' Mangold said. ''Not saying, 'I'm going to go out there and I'm going to try to mold myself after someone else.' Just going out there and taking what I know and putting that out on the field.''
        EXTRA POINTS
        Receiver Laveranues Coles, who has 87 catches for 1,065 yards and 6 touchdowns, did not mind being passed over for the Pro Bowl. A day after the results of the voting for the game in Hawaii on Feb. 10 were announced, Coles found out he had been voted the Jets' most valuable player by his teammates. ''That's more important to me than any Pro Bowl I could ever make,'' Coles said. ''It just says that the guys really care about me and what I mean to this team.'' The award was announced at a team meeting Wednesday morning. Coles said he was excited, but tried to play it cool. ''You don't want to jump up and clap for yourself, but it was great,'' he said. ''I'm very pleased that they feel that way about me.''
        Quarterback Chad Pennington received the team's most inspirational player award. Tight end Chris Baker, who regained his starting position after sustaining a season-ending leg injury last year, received the Ed Block Courage award. Safety Erik Coleman was recognized for his work in the community, and receiver Jerricho Cotchery was the recipient of the good guy award.
        The Dolphins prepared for their game two weeks ago against New England by acquiring network tapes of Patriots games that included isolated cuts, complete with audio, of quarterback Tom Brady. Members of the Dolphins' defense said it helped them immensely in picking up his cadence and the play being called. ''If they were able to get some value from that, it's really a good decision,'' Jets Coach Eric Mangini said. He added: ''We check out a couple of those tapes every now and then. It's within the framework, it's within the rules, it's fair and it's a good decision.''
        PRO FOOTBALL
      