
        During his five seasons as an end and a tackle for the Jets, Rick Lyle was the team's first line of defense. Three years into his retirement as a player, Lyle is back in the same role, only now the kitchen is his turf.
        Lyle, an assistant strength coach and nutrition coordinator, oversees the preparation and presentation of team meals. Instead of scanning backfields and rooting out quarterbacks, he now surveys hotel kitchens and tries to sniff out salmonella and other bacteria that can cause food poisoning.
        He prepped for the position, enrolling in a course on food preparation at Nassau Community College this past spring and passing the test to earn his ServSafe certification from the National Restaurant Association Educational Foundation.
        Every week, at home or on the road, the Jets stay at a hotel the night before the game. With 13 games behind him, Lyle has the routine down pat. When the Jets arrive in Minneapolis for their game Sunday against the Vikings, Lyle will drop his bag in his room, then head straight to the kitchen, where he will huddle with the head chef and his staff to review the meal strategy.
        After breaking from the huddle, he will systematically go through his checks: Is the reheating time and temperature control right? Are there safeguards in place to prevent cross-contamination of food? Is good personal hygiene being demonstrated? Are the dishes being prepared the ones that were ordered?
        (The Jets, like many N.F.L. teams, restrict access to their assistants. Lyle is not allowed to speak to reporters, but he was permitted to relay details of his food-safety routine through a Jets spokesman.)
        At the end of every road trip, Lyle writes a report on the food preparation and service and turns it into Coach Eric Mangini.
        Mangini is known for his meticulous attention to detail, and it was Mangini's idea to deploy Lyle to the kitchen.
        ''We thought it would be good for us to not only look at how the food is being served,'' Mangini said this week, ''but see if it's being prepared and stored properly so we don't get into a situation where someone gets food poisoning and a guy is inactive on game day because of an oversight in the kitchen.''
        But is one man's preparation another man's paranoia? ''It's not a question of trust,'' Mangini said. ''It's due diligence on our part in protecting our players and coaches.''
        The N.F.L. has not drawn up any guidelines for food safety. Coaches will often remind their players to be careful what they eat or try to steer them away from room service or restaurant meals. Mangini said his mentor, Patriots Coach Bill Belichick, ''used to mention to the players the importance of really thinking twice when you go out to dinner because you don't know how it's going to be prepared.''
        That seems to be the extent of most teams' vigilance, though it is hard to say for sure as most team officials, when asked about food preparation, are hard to pin down.
        Chris Argento, a registered dietician and certified executive chef and a professor at Queens College in New York, was pleasantly surprised to hear that Lyle had taken steps to earn his ServSafe certification.
        ''It's a smart idea,'' Argento said this week in a telephone interview. He added, ''I've never had anybody from a pro team call me up for a consultation on food safety training for their players.''
        The idea had been simmering in Mangini's head since he watched an assistant in New England become violently ill after eating shrimp during a Patriots dinner at the hotel where the team was staying.
        At the game the next day, his colleague, whom Mangini would not identify, kept getting sick to his stomach on the sideline.
        ''We'd lose him on the headsets because he was throwing up in a garbage can,'' Mangini said. ''He was just trying to survive the game instead of coaching the game.''
        It was bad enough that a coach became ill, but what if the afflicted had been the team's Pro Bowl linebacker or starting quarterback? It made Mangini queasy simply thinking about the potential for disaster that was served up at every team buffet.
        After Mangini was named the Jets' coach, he sat down with Mike Tannenbaum, who had been promoted to general manager. The topic on the table was food, which was not altogether unusual; both men enjoy a good meal.
        They quickly realized that food as pleasure was an entirely different conversation than food as fuel.
        ''Neither of us knew much about food other than we like it,'' Mangini said.
        Because Lyle already had a background in nutrition, he seemed the perfect candidate for food safety monitor. His work in the kitchen, which includes making sure the food is healthy fare and not only properly prepared, goes largely unnoticed by the players.
        Matt Chatham, a linebacker who followed Mangini to the Jets after spending his first six seasons in New England, is not surprised that Mangini would leave no pot unattended in his quest to emulate the Patriots' success.
        ''We cycled though a lot of food people in New England,'' he said. ''That was the toughest job in the house to keep.''
        When the veterans reported to their first minicamp under Mangini, they noticed their favorite cereals -- Frosted Flakes and Lucky Charms and the like -- were gone, replaced by cereals low in sugar. That was their first indication that football under Mangini would not be all sweetness and light.
        What it all boils down to is, the players are eating better at home, and so far no one has gotten food poisoning on the road.
        ''Knock on wood,'' Mangini said, rapping his knuckles on his desktop.
        PRO FOOTBALL
      