
        About three hours before kickoff, Indianapolis Colts Coach Tony Dungy was patiently signing autographs for dozens of fans at the team hotel Monday. Dungy has remained unruffled through his team's monthlong struggle to stay near the top of the American Football Conference, but around him, the Colts seemed close to crumpling as easily as a piece of paper in the clutches of an overeager fan.
        Their run defense was a disaster, and their offensive firepower, their bedrock, had been muted. After three losses in four games, their hold on home-field advantage in the playoffs had slipped away to San Diego.
        The Colts had already clinched their fourth consecutive A.F.C. South title when Jacksonville lost Sunday. But they wanted more when the Cincinnati Bengals, winners of their previous four, came for a visit: a shot at the No. 1 seeding and a bit of momentum to carry into January.
        For one game, at least, the Colts quieted the doubts that reside in their heads, and in the N.F.L., about their ability to compete against playoff-caliber opponents, beating the Bengals, 34-16, at the RCA Dome. The victory put the Colts 11-3, tied with the Ravens for the second-best record in the A.F.C., one game behind the Chargers. The Bengals dropped to 8-6 and into the sixth seeding in the A.F.C.
        Cincinnati and the Denver Broncos are in the wild-card spots now based on conference record, but there is a four-way tie at 8-6 that includes the Jets and the Jaguars. The loss also gave the Ravens the A.F.C. North title. ''We didn't look at it as a crisis,'' Dungy said of the Colts' recent struggles. ''You see it all the time in the league. The mind-set was not to do the spectacular, just do what we were supposed to do all across the board.''
        Peyton Manning completed 29 of 36 passes for 282 yards and 4 touchdowns, three on throws to Marvin Harrison. The Bengals' Carson Palmer finished 14 of 28 for 176 yards and no touchdowns.
        Colts fans may have been happiest to see Manning again firing the ball downfield to Harrison or dumping it off to Dominic Rhodes over the middle. With a virtually flawless display of accuracy, he exploited a Bengals pass defense that was last in the league entering the game. In the third quarter alone, Manning completed 8 of 9 passes for 100 yards and 2 touchdowns.
        But the plays that undoubtedly brought a smile to Dungy's face were the ones made by a revived Colts defense. Decimated by injuries, the Colts used their 10th different starting defensive lineup Monday, but this one may stick.
        The Colts repeatedly got pressure -- and sometimes put their bodies -- on Bengals quarterback Carson Palmer, who attempted only eight passes in the first half because the Bengals were so focused on running. The Colts' run defense was far from perfect -- Rudi Johnson had a 12-yard touchdown run in the second quarter, making at least four Colts miss tackles -- but it was good enough, especially on critical plays.
        ''We didn't do a lot different,'' Dungy said of the defense. ''We just tried to do what we were doing better.''
        The Colts stuffed Johnson on third-and-1 from the Indianapolis 12 early in the third quarter, forcing the Bengals to settle for a field goal on what was an important drive. The Colts had taken a 17-10 lead into the locker room at halftime thanks to a clock-chewing drive late in the second quarter that ended with Manning and Harrison adding to their record-setting partnership of touchdown passes. The two have now connected for 103 career touchdowns.
        ''There were two things I was thinking about tonight -- No. 87 and 88 and going to the old blanket,'' Manning said, referring to Reggie Wayne and Harrison.
        And when the Colts got the ball and began driving to open the third quarter, it appeared they might be able to easily put the game away. But on fourth-and-1 at the Cincinnati 45, the Colts decided to go for it, putting the game in the offense's hands. The decision backfired when the Bengals stuffed the rookie Joseph Addai.
        In recent weeks, that might have been the signal for the slide to begin, particularly against an explosive offense that was committed to running the ball. The Bengals got all the way to the 12, but when Colts linebacker Cato June, who had let Johnson slip out of a tackle early in the game, wrapped up Johnson, the Colts turned the tide of the game -- and maybe their season.
        The Colts followed with two quick touchdown scores -- a 1-yard pass to Harrison and a gorgeous 18-yard touch pass to Wayne that sailed over a defender's head and into Wayne's arms.
        That gave the Colts a 31-13 lead going into the fourth quarter and from there, all they had to do was hold on tight. That, of course, is what the Colts' small but speedy defense was built to do -- play with leads. Those have been in short supply for the Colts. But they found one -- and themselves -- just in time.
        FOOTBALL
      