
        Daisuke Matsuzaka received his first tour of Fenway Park on Thursday afternoon, even though the fabled ballpark looked like a construction site. A chain-link fence encircled the field, a Dumpster was filled with debris, and a tarpaulin covered the outfield and the plate. But the mound was uncovered.
        Matsuzaka, who held a baseball, noticed that the mound was one of the only places at the 94-year-old park that looked the way it will look next April. John Henry, the principal owner of the Red Sox, encouraged Matsuzaka, his new $103.1 million pitcher, to test out the dirt hill that will become his new home.
        So Matsuzaka strolled to the mound, a gloveless Henry crouched behind the plate and Matsuzaka threw his first pitch at Fenway to the man who will sign his lucrative paychecks. Matsuzaka's pitch was high and Henry leaped for it, tumbled backward and narrowly missed landing in a puddle.
        ''We didn't go over the signals,'' Henry explained.
        Henry smiled as he recounted Matsuzaka's errant pitch; Matsuzaka smiled then and throughout most of his introductory news conference. After 29 days of negotiations that veered from stagnant to tense to successful, the Red Sox and Scott Boras, Matsuzaka's agent, agreed to a six-year, $52 million contract late Wednesday.
        The relieved and happy Red Sox greeted Matsuzaka by showing his picture and listing his name in Japanese on the video scoreboard. Larry Lucchino, the club's president, said, ''Welcome to Boston,'' in Japanese to Matsuzaka. The club also served sushi to more than 300 reporters at an event with the feeling of a postseason pregame. That is, if the game pitted teams from two countries.
        ''We understand his importance in Japan,'' General Manager Theo Epstein said. ''We know what he represents.''
        After posting $51.1 million, the Red Sox won the right to negotiate with Matsuzaka, then sweated it out and traveled to Boras's backyard before getting a deal.
        Matsuzaka, who was 108-60 with a 2.95 earned run average with the Seibu Lions, wore a black suit with red pinstripes and a red, black and white striped tie. He is still learning the intimate details about what it means to pitch for the Red Sox, who are viewed as everyone's team in New England.
        ''Everybody told me I should say I'm going to beat the Yankees,'' Matsuzaka said, through a translator. ''I thought it was a joke, so I didn't say that.''
        If Matsuzaka had vowed to foil the Yankees, he might have received even more attention, if that was possible. There were 18 satellite trucks lined up on Van Ness Street beside Fenway. When Matsuzaka held up his Red Sox jersey for the first time, an electrical storm of flash bulbs popped for at least 30 seconds.
        During a 45-minute news conference, Matsuzaka smiled and laughed a lot. But Japanese reporters said Tak Sato, Matsuzaka's translator, did not fully translate Matsuzaka's responses, so the pitcher's personality was mostly disguised from American reporters. A Japanese reporter provided a full translation and the words proved that Matsuzaka was poised and had a swagger, which is the scouting report for him on the mound, too.
        When Matsuzaka was asked about achieving his lifelong dream of playing in the major leagues, he clarified his thoughts on dreams.
        ''I hate the word dream because a dream is a dream,'' Matsuzaka said. ''It's not what happens. So to come here, I make it a goal. I believe I can be in the major leagues.''
        When Matsuzaka was asked about the size of his contract, which could climb to $60 million if he reaches incentives, he showed his confidence.
        ''For that amount, I feel pressure, but it's a little,'' Matsuzaka said. Then, for emphasis, he added, ''It's a little.''
        After Hideki Okajima, a Japanese reliever, signed with the Red Sox two weeks ago, he said that Matsuzaka did not feel pressure.
        Matsuzaka wore a Boston Bruins jersey to drop the first puck for their game with the Devils on Thursday night. Boras said Matsuzaka would speak with Jason Varitek, the Red Sox catcher and another Boras client, on Friday.
        With a fatigued look, Matsuzaka described the negotiations as long, presumably indicating that he experienced anxiety as they dragged on. Matsuzaka said one of the turning points in the discussions was when he realized that the Red Sox would be diligent about making sure that he, his wife and his daughter had as seamless a transition as possible.
        ''I didn't want to make that decision to go back to Japan,'' Matsuzaka said.
        As a high school senior, Matsuzaka became an instant legend when he threw 250 pitches to win a 17-inning quarterfinal game in the Koshien tournament and returned two days later to twirl a no-hitter in the championship. Over all, he pitched four straight days and threw 535 pitches.
        Matsuzaka has also pitched in two Olympics, he won a title with the Lions and he was the most valuable player in the World Baseball Classic.
        ''We feel Daisuke certainly has the makeup and the history to be able to deal with all the pressures of playing and winning in Boston,'' Epstein said.
        Boras echoed Epstein by saying Matsuzaka was a child prodigy and was used to big crowds and big expectations. In highlighting how intensely Matsuzaka is covered, Boras recounted how 70 Japanese reporters were in his office parking lot when he arrived at 4:30 a.m. this week seeking an update on the Matsuzaka negotiations.
        ''In Japan,'' Boras said, ''he's the equivalent of Michael Jordan.''
        The souvenir store on Yawkey Way did not yet have Matsuzaka jerseys with his No. 18, Johnny Damon's old number. But Amanda Geggatt, who works at the store, said the phone had been ringing nonstop with requests for Matsuzaka T-shirts or jerseys or anything.
        ''If it rings one more time,'' she said, ''I'm going to pull it out of the wall.''
        But the phone is bound to keep ringing. Matsuzaka mania is just beginning here. The Red Sox feel Matsuzaka is one of the elite pitchers in the world and they are eager for him to show it. Matsuzaka is eager to throw pitches that matter at Fenway, eager to pursue a goal that is not a dream.
        ''As a member of the Boston Red Sox, I'd like to contribute to a world champions,'' Matsuzaka said. ''And I'd like to meet Curt Schilling.''
        BASEBALL
      