
        In response to the movement of gangs from urban centers to suburbs in New Jersey, the Township Council in Hamilton, a suburb of Trenton, has passed an ordinance to create what it calls gang-free zones, similar in intent to drug-free zones.
        Under the measure, which was passed Dec. 5, anyone convicted of recruiting members for a street gang within 2,500 feet of a township school or park would face a $2,000 fine or up to 90 days of jail or community service.
        The New Jersey Legislature passed a law in 1999 that criminalized gang recruiting but did not provide additional penalties for recruiting near schools or parks.
        ''The current state law makes no distinction about where gang recruiting takes place, and we think it should,'' Mayor Glen D. Gilmore said. ''What we're trying to do with this ordinance is send a message that we are being particularly vigilant around our schools and parks.''
        The Hamilton Township School District pushed the City Council to pass the legislation, said Neil A. Bencivengo, the district superintendent. ''We haven't had any severe gang issues here,'' he said, ''but if there's one, that's one too many.'' The school district posts armed police officers at each school, he said.
        Since mid-November, five people with gang ties in the Trenton area have been shot dead, the Trenton police say.
        The effectiveness of anti-gang and other exclusion zones is debatable, said James O'Kane, a sociology professor at Drew University and an expert on urban crime. ''My gut reaction is that they really don't work in the long run,'' he said. ''Gang recruiting is usually done through word of mouth, friendship and peer group influence. Schools, for the most part, are not where gangs are recruited.''
        Kimberly K. Ferzan, a professor at the Camden campus of the Rutgers School of Law, said the critical question is how a gang is defined.
        ''A gang is not a protected freedom of association,'' she said, ''but that all hinges on being sure that you have the kind of definition that is sufficiently narrowly tailored so that you are not getting noncriminal conduct in the mix.''
        DAVID K. RANDALL
        THE WEEK
      