
        COMPLAINTS ON ENTRY -- Foreign business and leisure travelers are making their feelings known about difficulties in entering the United States. In a survey, foreign travelers rated the entry process the worst among the seven top regional destinations in the world, according to the Discover America Partnership, a tourism industry and business group that promotes foreign travel. Geoff Freeman, executive director of the group, said the study should be a ''wake-up call'' for the United States government to improve customer service and other procedures for visitors. While foreign visitors overwhelmingly reported positive experiences once they were in the United States, ''perceptions of a rude and arrogant entry process are turning away travelers and harming America's image,'' he said, adding that business travel to the United States was down 10 percent in that period, while it was growing in other regions. The survey, which found that more than half of foreign visitors said immigration officials here were rude, was conducted in this fall by RT Strategies, a polling firm. Ranked from the top, the six destinations that scored higher than the United States were Europe, Asia, Canada, Australia and New Zealand, and the Middle East.
        LATE TO THE GATE -- Seems like old times in the domestic airline industry, which reported that 22.37 percent of flights arrived late through October of this year, compared with 20.8 percent in the period last year. That is according to the Bureau of Transportation Statistics of the Transportation Department. The worst late-arrival percentage in the last decade was 23.06 percent in 2000, after which percentages fell steadily until the travel recovery in 2004, when 19.43 percent of flights arrived late. Among individual airlines, Comair was the only one with two flights that were late 100 percent of the time in October. Those were Flight 5463, from Kennedy International Airport to Buffalo, which was late each of the 31 days for an average of 173 minutes, and Comair Flight 5283, from Kennedy to Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport, late every day in the month for an average of 92 minutes.
        NICE RIDE IN HONG KONG -- The Peninsula Hong Kong hotel bought a new fleet of 14 Rolls-Royce Phantoms, which retail at $395,000 each before custom touches. Those touches include a refrigerated box for chilled hand towels and a high-quality entertainment system. Guests can hire the cars for transportation to and from the airport or around Hong Kong.
        EAT IT AND BEAT IT -- Sofitel Hotels has introduced a ''30-Minute Lunch'' for travelers in a hurry at restaurants in its 11 hotels in North America. The four-course lunch is guaranteed to be on the table within 15 minutes after ordering. It is prix fixe, from $18 to $28. Sofitel is a luxury hotel brand of Accor.
        JOE SHARKEY
        ITINERARIES
      