
        Jane Pollicino did not quite know what she would write when she picked up a marker yesterday morning and set it against a steel beam, painted white, that is to become one of the supporting columns at the base of Freedom Tower.
        In blue permanent ink, Mrs. Pollicino poured out a message to her husband, Steve, a bond trader who died in the north tower of the World Trade Center on Sept. 11, 2001. ''The circumstances of your death have allowed me to know you in ways I couldn't have imagined,'' she wrote. ''I thank you for having been a part of your life and I thank God for our children.'' She added, ''Until we meet again, 'you will be my music' '' -- a reference to the Sinatra song that was played at their wedding in 1978.
        Scores of relatives signed their names, wrote messages and taped photographs on the beam, more than 30 feet long, which was available to be signed for five hours yesterday in a vacant lot in Battery Park City. Gov. George E. Pataki, who leaves office at the end of the month, wrote on the beam, as did Daniel Libeskind, the architect overseeing the master plan for the ground zero site.
        ''This beam is not only supporting a physical building, it's supporting the spirit of America,'' Mr. Libeskind said.
        Construction of the 1,776-foot tower, which is to include 2.6 million square feet of office space, formally began in April, but the long-delayed project continues to be hobbled by uncertainty.
        On Friday, Anthony E. Shorris, Governor-elect Eliot Spitzer's choice to be the next executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, said that the new administration would take a ''fresh look'' at the project, but cautioned that there would be little leeway to make major changes.
        Asked if he thought that his successor would try to alter the design and construction of the tower, Mr. Pataki said yesterday, ''I certainly hope not.'' The departing governor brushed aside concerns about the economic feasibility of the tower, saying, ''This can't be strictly about dollars and cents.''
        The beam is one of 27 giant box columns that are to be erected by May at the base of the tower.
      