
        DEAR DIARY:
        I was looking for an old fan in the attic and found instead a 48-star flag and the sleek and slender wedding dress I wore 50 years ago when I, too, was sleek and slender. And a scrapbook from the years 1943-1948 with the contents pure New York nostalgia.
        1943: City of New York transit pass, 5 cents.
        Menu: Ed Winston's tropical bar in Greenwich Village, gin and tonic, 53 cents.
        Date: Henry Grunwald.
        1944: Philharmonic ticket, Carnegie Hall, $3.60.
        Ticket: First airplane ride, Washington to New York, $11.65.
        1945: Newspaper clipping, Brooklyn residents offer drinks from first-floor windows to celebrate end of war in Europe.
        Pin: V-J Day.
        1946: Dance, American Veterans Committee,  $1.50.
        Playbill: ''Harvey,'' 48th Street Theater, Frank Fay.
        No fan.
        BARBARA COLE FEIDEN
        Thomas E. Healy and his wife, Jane, both outdoor enthusiasts who live in Vail, Colo., were visiting their children and grandchildren in Manhattan last month and enjoying an afternoon in Central Park. Near their picnic spot, a 40-ish father was playing, quite raucously, with his son. He eventually climbed quite far up a small, budding tree to demonstrate either his enthusiasm for the day or perhaps his retained prowess.
        As he reached a level of about 15 feet, shouting all the way, he grabbed a branch that was apparently covered with some unpleasant natural residue. Mr. Healy, much amused, reported the reaction: ''With much surprise, this obvious city dweller exclaimed: 'Can you believe it? There have been birds in this tree!!' ''
        SUBWAY
        I stand and wait at the platform gate
        this morning I'm running a little late
        the train is nowhere to be found
        the tunnel is not making a sound.
        I stand and shuffle my feet back and forth
        this is a daily occurrence, of course
        people are gathering, they are close at hand
        we are all huddled in this subterranean land.
        I stand and lean myself against a pole
        now I begin to fidget and stroll
        cursing to myself when will it come
        for I'm part of this frenzy and have succumbed.
        JEFF BURGESS
        Dear Diary:
        I have lived for the last 30 years in a building housing people in the arts, have developed a nodding acquaintance with some tenants and am friendlier with others in varying degrees. The other day, I got into an elevator with two other original tenants, an actor I've seen on screen but whose name I don't know, and a woman I know by name.
        ''Hi, Sheila,'' I greeted her. She nodded and smiled.
        ''Is your name Sheila?'' the actor asked. She nodded.
        ''But,'' he said, ''I've been calling you Lillian for years and you never corrected me.''
        ''Yes,'' she replied, ''and you never heard me answer you, either, did you?''
        DOLORES DU BOIS
        One of the homework questions Susan Mayerowitz gave her second-grade class was to name three bodies of water. One child, no slouch at keeping up with current trends, wrote: ''Pellegrino, Deer Park and Evian.''
        When it isn't used for transit information, the message board inside the token booth at the 71st/ Continental Avenue subway station in Forest Hills, Queens, carries inspirational quotes put up by the staff. Donald Singer particularly liked this one: ''It is only with the heart that one can see rightly. What is essential is invisible to the eye.''
        Elaine Sloan was walking up Fifth Avenue when she saw a homeless man with a pit bull by his side and a pushcart loaded with paraphernalia. She asked if he would be willing to give up the dog if she could find it a home. When he replied in the affirmative, she said she would need some time to work on it and asked how she could connect with him again.
        In an instant, he pulled out a cell phone. ''Let me give you my number,'' he said. She gave him her office number and the two exchanged calls for a couple of weeks, but Ms. Sloan had no luck placing the dog. Both man and dog have since disappeared. The cell phone still rings, but there's no answer.
        A CITY GIRL'S LAMENT
        Oh, there's beauty out here in the country
        The beauty of flowers and trees.
        And as I rejoice in the bounties of nature,
        I sneeze and I sneeze and I sneeze.
        ELEANOR BESEN
        Dear Diary:
        It happened on a crowded 86th Street crosstown bus, one of those double-size buses with accordion pleats. At Central Park West, there were a number of people waiting to get on and off, and I was pleased when the driver finally closed the door, waiting for the light to change. As it was, I was going to be late for an appointment.
        Suddenly, a woman from the back came forth holding something and called out: ''He dropped his wallet. Can you catch him?''
        The driver asked, ''Do you know which one it was?''
        ''Yes, I'm sure,'' the woman said. ''He was a heavyset man who just got off.''
        The driver opened the door and honked vigorously, but no one turned around.
        Seconds later, the driver said: ''Go find him. He must be just around the corner. I'll wait for you.''
        When the woman hesitated, looking down at the small child she was with, several people said: ''Don't worry, we'll take care of the child. Go.''
        Off she ran, rounded a corner and came back in a minute or two, smiling, triumphant and empty-handed. She had found him. He was flabbergasted and, of course, very grateful.
        As she climbed back on to the bus, we all cheered, and it was almost as if we had all participated in this good deed. All that day, I glowed with the memory, and every time I think of it, it makes me proud to be a New Yorker.
        JANE S. GOULD
        Louise Weiss depressingly relates the following tale of a telephone call to Citibank customer service.
        L.W.: ''I'd like to know the location of A.T.M.'s in Norway that will accept my Citicard.''
        Citibank: ''Is that in . . . which state?''
        L.W.: ''It's in Europe.''
        Citibank: ''Oh, Europe.'' Long silence. ''Exactly where is Norway located? In which country?''
        L.W.: ''Norway is a country.''
        Citibank then gave her another number where, after listening to Barber's Adagio for Strings, she got a mechanical voice that started with Andorra and eventually informed her that there are 740 A.T.M.'s in Norway. The country. In Europe.
      