
        Members of the Mets' front office were planning to fly cross-country this morning in the hopes of trying to persuade Barry Zito to do the same. A four-member contingent, led by the senior executive vice president, Jeff Wilpon, and General Manager Omar Minaya, was set to depart for Los Angeles to have its first face-to-face meeting with Zito.
        At dinner tonight with Zito and his agent, Scott Boras, the Mets' delegation, which also includes the assistant general manager John Ricco and the vice president for development, Tony Bernazard, will begin its efforts to persuade Zito, a lifelong Californian, to pitch the next several seasons in New York.
        The Mets met with Boras at the winter meetings in Orlando, Fla., two weeks ago, when they discussed the parameters of a contract but did not make an official offer. They are reluctant to cede to Boras's request for a six- or seven-year deal, preferring five years, and are unwilling to spend nearly as much as the $100 million the Texas Rangers are believed to be pondering.
        Zito is 28, left-handed and unfailingly durable, having made 34 or more starts in each of the past six seasons.
        Boras excels at pitting teams against one another, raising their bids to see which one will blink first. But if the Mets do not budge from their ceiling, in the $75 million range, then Zito will have to consider whether to sign with the team that offered him the most money or perhaps the best chance of winning the World Series.
        Minaya has said several times that he will not overspend for pitching. If Zito prices himself out of the Mets' range, Minaya will intensify his pursuit of a front-line starter through a trade.
        BEN SHPIGEL
        BASEBALL: ROUNDUP
        Correction:  December 27, 2006, Wednesday  A report in the baseball roundup on Dec. 19 about a Mets delegation that met with the pitcher Barry Zito and his agent referred incorrectly to Zito's background. He was born in Las Vegas and moved to California as a child; he is not a lifelong Californian.
      