
        Torn between two cash cows, feeling like a tool, beleaguered commissioners have been stammering through their romantic platitudes on sportsmanship this past week as they confront an underlying question: What is artistic expression and what is a peep show?
        How nice does a league have to be for its image-conscious corporate sponsors?
        How naughty should it get for the ratings cravings of its network partners?
        Tune in Christmas Day for the answers.
        N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell has spit-shined a treat for you by scheduling Terrell Owens and the Dallas Cowboys against the post-Owens Eagles in a churlish matchup that will roll with all the sooty charm of Pottersville.
        It's not that Goodell isn't capable of taste judgments. He suspended the Detroit assistant coach Joe Cullen for conduct detrimental to the league on Monday after two recent police charges: driving without pants and driving under the influence.
        It's not that Goodell can't dole out superstar discipline. He fined Owens, a serial-offender of etiquette, $35,000 for spitting in the face of Falcons cornerback DeAngelo Hall last weekend. But as Hall told reporters on Sunday, ''What would hurt him a lot more than a fine is making him sit.''
        Suspensions are audience killers, though. So are injuries.
        For a tiresome third straight year, the N.B.A. will perpetuate the holiday tradition of a dysfunctional gathering between two teams in a hyped opportunity to reveal the awkward silence of the season.
        A show about my family? No (not quite). Instead, Commissioner David Stern will present Lakers versus Heat in yet another chance to relive an ''E! True Hollywood Story'' about ego and jealousy that culminated in a vicious split between Kobe and Shaq. Trouble is Shaq was last seen recovering from knee surgery. If he is in the building, will Shaq shake Kobe's hand in a bygones moment as he did on Martin Luther King Day last year or call him out as he has done before? A marquee is nothing without blood feud intrigue.
        And yet it was only Monday when Stern was telling the public about his expectations for comportment and class among players after a brawl erupted over ego and jealousy (between Isiah Thomas and George Karl) at Madison Square Garden. Maybe the public wasn't Stern's target audience, though.
        ''Commissioners realize, first and foremost, that their sponsors and broadcast partners are critical,'' said David M. Carter, executive director at the University of Southern California Sports Business Institute. ''When Stern holds a press conference, he is speaking to them far more than he is speaking to fans.
        ''Fans put up with anything. Fans put up with being priced out of buildings. They put up with players who, too often, don't show them deference. So you can make an argument that, since the fans never seem to curtail their spending on sports, the leagues don't have to solicit their feedback.''
        A commissioner's aim to please is confused by the needs of two constituencies. League sponsors demand a riveting product image but have a low tolerance for any issue that will alienate consumers. Network partners long for a hot promo topic that may or may not push the envelope on salaciousness but will attract viewers.
        Commissioners are the enablers to the paradox whenever the hard line they verbalize doesn't match with the inflammatory personalities they market.
        The image contradiction isn't solely a commish issue. Just about any polarizing superstar can find validation from an owner or team or company. It was the Cowboys' proprietor Jerry Jones who signed up Owens -- and his Sharpie-wielding, team-dividing past -- for $25 million in March.
        It was the Nuggets who made Allen Iverson -- always effortful as a player, if mercurial as a leader -- a happy individualist yesterday when the team plucked A. I. out of his misery in Philly for a life more Melo. This fresh start will begin once Carmelo Anthony serves his time for his role in Saturday night's ''Fight Club'' moment at the Garden.
        Even outside the pro mainstream, there is a lucrative reward for outrageous misfits. Bode Miller all but serenaded the world with ''99 Bottles of Beer on the Wall'' when he treated the Turin Games as his spring break, but he found a new sponsor to replace the old. America's Hippie of the Hill hadn't freaked out everyone. So long, Barilla. Hello, Superfund.
        The United States Ski and Snowboard Association's chief, Bill Marolt, adopted a Bode code of conduct this season to soothe the anxieties of sponsors like Visa. And yet, Miller doesn't believe in debt service to anyone. He continues to rebel and resist and win and remain on the team.
        At least Marolt can say he did something. So can Goodell. So can Stern.
        A commissioner's lip service may not be fulfilling or consistent, but it is enough for sponsors. And with this kind of sway, it's corporate America and the network partners who are truly policing the images of the leagues.
        What odd ethics cops. The business world's standards are not always that reliable. Remember baseball's Enron Field in Houston? The networks aren't always the best watchdogs of decency. It took public outrage to cancel Fox's O. J. Simpson extravaganza.
        In surrendering their autonomy, commissioners have ultimately given up their moral authority. Who are they to decide who's naughty and what's nice?
        SPORTS OF THE TIMES E-mail: selenasports@nytimes.com
      