
        For the Rangers, momentum proved as elusive as a rumor. It was something they thought they had earned in a five-game winning streak but instead was something they lost in the exhaust fumes of two embarrassing losses.
        The Devils, in contrast, had no momentum entering last night's game at Madison Square Garden, just a three-game losing streak and some head-scratching issues.
        By the time the Devils finished off the last touches of a 6-1 victory against the Rangers, neither team had many answers about what had turned its fortunes around, just the jarring feeling that came with it.
        ''Every time you come into this building, it's big,'' Devils forward Scott Gomez said. ''We had to stop the bleeding a little bit. It worked out. It was a complete game for us. At a good time.''
        For the Rangers, the turn felt like whiplash, and the five-game streak became a faded memory. They gave up nine goals to Toronto on Saturday night, then watched the Devils turn a closely played game into a six-goal celebration.
        The consolation available to the Rangers (18-12-4) was that they hold a 2-point lead in the Atlantic Division over the Devils (18-12-2) and that some of their woes could be traced to playing without their top two centers, Michael Nylander (flu) and Matt Cullen (sprained knee). They also played a stretch without defenseman Marek Malik, who left the game with a groin injury.
        But the Rangers were not willing to lean on that.
        ''We are paid to play,'' Rangers Coach Tom Renney said. ''There's enough players on the ice to go out and win a game. We have to accept the responsibility. The guys do. They get it.''
        For the first period, the Rangers were playing intelligently and the Devils were struggling to generate offense. An early Devils power play looked disjointed. Kevin Weekes seemed comfortable, taking Henrik Lundqvist's place in goal after Lundqvist gave up seven of Toronto's goals Saturday.
        But it all changed after the Rangers stretched a Devils power play into a five-on-three when Martin Straka joined Jarkko Immonen in the penalty box, and Patrik Elias blasted a slap shot past Weekes for a 1-0 lead with 34 seconds left in the first period.
        The Devils scored two more power-play goals in the second period, separated only by a rare goal by Rangers forward Petr Prucha, and the Rangers were officially reeling. Devils goalie Martin Brodeur made 35 saves, keeping the Rangers at bay.
        ''I don't think there is a whole lot of examination needed to know what went wrong in the last 48 hours,'' forward Brendan Shanahan said. ''We are a step slow all over the ice, which leads to breakdowns, which leads to penalties, which leads to power-play goals for the other team.''
        The third period got downright weird. Elias scored again with 5:01 to go to put the Devils ahead, 5-1, but the goal judge did not immediately rule it a goal. Play did not stop, allowing for video review, until 1:42 remained. When it was judged a goal, the clock was reset to 5:01.
        The Devils did not mind.
        ''Everybody did our job tonight,'' Elias said. ''The power play was good. The penalty kill was great. Marty made great saves early in the game. We counted on them to get a little tired as the game went on and it worked out that way.''
        The Rangers did have an unfriendly schedule last week, with three road games in a row that produced victories in Philadelphia and Dallas capped by the debacle in Toronto. They get a day to recover before playing the Islanders at the Garden tomorrow night.
        ''The Islanders aren't going to feel sorry for us,'' Shanahan said. ''They aren't going to dress eight in their lineup because we aren't 100 percent. You have to take it as a test. The last two nights, we haven't done well with that.''
        Renney said he also believed the five-game winning streak had been a bit of a mirage. Lundqvist and Weekes had played so well in that span that it disguised some shortcomings.
        ''I'm not sure what it is exactly, if it's an underlying mentality within our room that things are going to be O.K., or if it's a fear of losing where you're playing not to lose as opposed to playing to win, or maybe placing too much on our goaltending to bail us out,'' Renney said. ''It's probably all of the above.''
        SLAP SHOTS
        Rangers forward Petr Prucha emerged from an extended slump to score his first goal since Nov. 10.
        HOCKEY
      