
        Saying that reducing New Jersey's property taxes turned out to be more complicated than they had anticipated, Gov. Jon S. Corzine and Assembly Speaker Joseph J. Roberts Jr. said Tuesday that they could need another two months to finish the job.
        Mr. Roberts suggested that Mr. Corzine had delayed the process by diving late last week into one of the most contentious issues: pension and health benefits.
        ''There clearly was some confusion,'' Mr. Roberts told reporters during a conference of the New Jersey Business and Industry Association here. ''There clearly was some miscommunication, and that resulted in frustration on the part of members of the Legislature.''
        With an average annual bill of $6,000 per household, New Jersey has the dubious distinction of having the highest property taxes in the country. With polls showing that property tax ranks as the biggest concern of residents -- and with all 120 legislators facing re-election in Nov. 2007 -- officials have felt a gnawing sense of urgency to do something substantial, and to do it soon.
        In July, Mr. Corzine demanded that the Legislature present him with a package of proposals to provide long-term relief by Jan. 1. In special sessions since then, lawmakers have wrestled with how to encourage local governments to share more resources, revamp the state's formula for financing education and overhaul pension benefits.
        But last week, Mr. Corzine wrote a letter to Mr. Roberts and Senate President Richard J. Codey, both Democrats like the governor, that demanded all pension proposals be set aside for the collective bargaining process during negotiations with public employees.
        Mr. Codey and Mr. Roberts criticized Mr. Corzine's moves in a newspaper article over the weekend, prompting a second letter from the governor on Sunday, challenging the two legislative leaders to pass their bills.
        Consensus on a framework was apparently reached in a series of meetings on Monday; Mr. Roberts and Mr. Corzine repeatedly used the same line -- being on the ''same page'' -- in separate appearances at the conference here on Tuesday.
        Mr. Roberts and Mr. Codey have said that their top priority is giving a 20 percent property tax credit to households earning less than $100,000 per year, or roughly 70 percent of the state. Households that earn $100,000 to $250,000 would receive a smaller tax credit.
        Mr. Corzine has said he supports a 20 percent credit. But he also insisted Tuesday that the Legislature agree to caps on annual property tax increases, and that it create an appointed state comptroller to investigate spending by all local government bodies.
        ''If I don't see the elements that give me confidence that we have the ability to sustain this over a period of time, we will hold up on the credit bill program,'' Mr. Corzine said. ''That isn't going to happen without a lot of Maalox moments as we go through this process.''
        Still, Mr. Corzine said that he was encouraged by the Legislature's efforts, and that he was confident that the state would be able to deliver what he called a ''real program'' before his budget address, scheduled for Feb. 27.
        ''If it slips 30 days, that I don't think is the end of the world,'' he said, when asked about the Jan. 1 deadline. ''Let's make sure we do it right, let's not rush and make mistakes in how we write bills that have unintended consequences.''
      