
        There's a certain facial expression, a mix of anguish and unsated desire, that Sonia Gordon knows she will see each time she tells one of her customers that her restaurant has run out of oxtail stew.
        ''People leave work, and oxtail is on their mind,'' said Ms. Gordon, the owner and the cook at Stir It Up, a West Indian restaurant on Atlantic Avenue near Third Avenue in Boerum Hill, Brooklyn. ''It's a real disappointment for them if they can't have it, so sometimes I give them a free ginger beer to say, 'I feel your pain.' ''
        Ms. Gordon and her customers have been experiencing these shared pangs ever since the retail price of oxtail surged around 20 percent in recent months. Her profit margin has shrunk so much, she said, that she cannot risk being left with unsold stew at day's end. As a result, she's cooking about one-third less of it.
        Oxtail, the tail of beef cattle, is considered a delicacy by Caribbean-Americans and other lovers of West Indian food. Wholesalers typically sell it in 15-pound boxes containing several tails, each of which is then sliced crosswise by a butcher into discs. Each disc looks a bit like a small wheel, with small chunks of meat between bony spokes.
        The retail price of a 15-pound box of frozen oxtail has risen to about $45 from about $37 since midsummer. Given that only a small proportion of each tail is meat, Ms. Gordon and other restaurateurs have been puzzling over why oxtail prices have gone up far faster than those of other, meatier cuts of beef.
        ''It's bone and fat,'' Ms. Gordon said as she forked four steaming brown discs of cooked oxtail onto a plate; she charges $8 for four such pieces with rice and vegetables. ''So why does it cost so much?''
        The answer is supply and demand. Although oxtail had once been considered almost a throwaway meat in New York, its price rose steadily in the last three decades as Caribbean islanders began immigrating in large numbers and settling in Brooklyn neighborhoods like Crown Heights and East Flatbush.
        ''Now it's a big demand thing,'' said Herbert Jolly, a Jamaican immigrant who works at the Utica Meat Warehouse, a retailer in East Flatbush. ''And if a restaurant don't have it, they can close the door.''
        Meat retailers, like Enrique Calderon, a co-owner of Utica, say they are only passing along price increases from wholesale distributors. The distributors say the higher prices come from the slaughterhouses. ''They tell you that foreign buyers came in, and there's a short supply of cows,'' said Shri Persad, a co-owner of Melba Utica Packing Company, a wholesale distributor in East Flatbush.
        Still, when oxtail lovers need a fix, not even high prices will keep them away.
        ''Get me some oxtail, and open a can of beans with the white rice,'' Rachel Oldacre, a 59-year-old Jamaican, said the other day as she stood in the checkout line at the Utica Meat Warehouse. ''Mercy! Lick your fingers!''
        JOHN FREEMAN GILL
        NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: BROOKLYN UP CLOSE
      