
        To the Editor:
        Re ''White House to Delay Shift on Iraq Until Early in 2007'' (front page, Dec. 13):
        After leading our country into a dead-end street in Iraq, President Bush appears lost as he faces decision time for his administration to make a U-turn and extract the fighting force from Iraq.
        He has said he is the ''decider,'' yet he has been going around listening to a variety of advisers whose advice most probably conflicts with the cheery positions that he and Vice President Dick Cheney (the gray eminence at the White House) have taken for the three years of the conflict.
        The American people have spoken by means of the midterm election, in effect demanding an end to the killing of our brave service men and women in a hopeless cause.
        After more than three years of a war without a foreseeable end, a clear presidential decision for a turnaround is needed now, not next year.
        Burton Kreindel  Newton, Mass., Dec. 13, 2006
        To the Editor:
        On Dec. 12, almost four years into the Iraq war, Tony Snow, the White House press secretary, used these words to explain why President Bush is delaying a decision on how to proceed in Iraq:
        ''You would expect and desire a commander in chief, in looking at a situation, to examine military concerns, security concerns, diplomatic concerns, internal political concerns within Iraq, regional ramifications, how you get people to work in concert with one another.''
        If only this commander in chief had that purposeful, deliberative, broad presence of mind in 2002-03.
        Nathan Frerichs  Crystal Lake, Ill., Dec. 13, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Let me see if I have this straight. President Bush rushes into war with Iraq under false pretenses as a feeble Congress spouts patriotic platitudes. Today, that same war is as unpopular as the president.
        And yet as the killing continues, Mr. Bush has decided to postpone a decision on what to do next until after the holidays.
        Can it be any clearer that this administration does not operate in the real world?
        Ranald Totten  Wilmington, N.C., Dec. 13, 2006
        To the Editor:
        As a supporter of President Bush through two elections, I share the frustration and anger of your Dec. 13 editorial ''Without Deliberate Speed.''
        I opposed the invasion of Iraq on moral grounds. Unhappily, our premature withdrawal now would also be morally objectionable, since the casualties from the ensuing religious conflict in Iraq in the wake of a premature United States withdrawal from Iraq would be staggering and the geopolitical consequences unimaginable.
        As the president contemplates a new course of action, he needs to isolate and remove from positions of influence the incompetent clan of neoconservatives who supported this disastrous Iraq incursion in the first place.
        Richard H. Escobales Jr.  Buffalo, Dec. 13, 2006
        To the Editor:
        You urge immediate action (really, reaction) by the president while acknowledging that the problem is very complex with no desirable solutions. That you don't seem to see the paradox in your position is puzzling.
        Isn't it better to get all points of view, proceed deliberately and get a decision that is as correct as possible?
        As you note, the Iraq Study Group report is not sacred writ. In fact, it is bereft of any real input by the military: for example, the 12,000 to 20,000 ''embedded'' United States military advisers, something that would require logistics and security forces of at least five to seven times that number, begs for close military analysis.
        I hold no brief for the president on this issue; he has made serious mistakes. But I hope that he looks at all sides, gets all views and considers the long-term effects of his decision and not just the ''feel good'' short-term domestic political effects.
        If that takes an extra three weeks or so, so be it.
        Ronald M. Holdaway  Draper, Utah, Dec. 13, 2006
        The writer is a retired Army brigadier general.
        To the Editor:
        Re ''The Time Is Now'' (column, Dec. 11): Bob Herbert so poignantly states, ''There is something agonizingly tragic about soldiers dying in a war that has already been lost.''
        I never thought that there would be another Vietnam war in my lifetime. How could President Bush have gotten us into this mess when the lesson of history is so fresh in our minds?
        But then I guess my memories of the Vietnam era, not to speak of the memories of the soldiers who had to fight, are quite different from Mr. Bush's memories of that time.
        Pamela Keating  Dover, Mass., Dec. 12, 2006
      