
        In the last few years, dirndls, the low-cut yet curiously wholesome dresses traditional in Bavaria, have been making a spirited comeback. On a recent Wednesday afternoon at Wies'n Tracht & Mehr on Tal Strasse in Munich (one of its two stores in the city), the shop was like Germany's version of Century 21. Young locals and tourists were stripping down under mounted deer antlers and behind packed racks of Alpine sweaters, frantically trying on different versions of the milkmaid-style dress. It didn't take long to understand why the store drew such a crush of customers.
        High-quality, ready-made dirndls can typically start at 400 euros, or $533 at $1.36 to the euro; at Wies'n Trach, below, both new and vintage dirndls go for the remarkably affordable price of either 49.90 or 59.90 euros ($66 or $80). Add an apron (short ones for 17.90 euros; long for 22.90) and the traditional off-the-shoulder white blouse (17.90 euros), and one can leave with a colorful Bavarian costume for less than 100 euros ($133).
        ''Many of the dirndl shops are only open around Oktoberfest,'' said the Munich-based fashion designer Lola Paltinger. ''But Wies'n Tracht sells dirndls all year round. It's great for tourists because they don't have to spend so much, but they can have fun and feel Bavarian.''
        If anyone knows about the current dirndl trend, it's Ms. Paltinger. Seven years ago she opened a bespoke dirndl atelier just around the corner from Wies'n Tracht. Unlike the affordable deals you can find at the latter, her atelier, Lollipop & Alpenrock, sells glamorous custom-made dirndls (see detail above) starting at 2,000 euros ($2,660). ''We use very high quality fabrics,'' Ms. Paltinger said. ''My designs are not so traditional. They're glamorous and a bit funny.''
        By funny she means a tiger-striped dirndl with an apron covered in rhinestones. Think Bavarian dresses, Paris Hilton style. In fact, Ms. Paltinger said she recently made several dirndls for Paris Hilton. ''One of them was gold brocade with a see-through golden tulle apron. She wore it because she represents Rich Prosecco (sparkling wine in a gold-colored can) and the dress matched.''
        Wies'n Tracht & Mehr, Tal 19, Munich, Germany; no phone; www.wiesn-tracht-mehr.de.
        Lollipop & Alpenrock, Tal 27, Munich; (49-89) 20 11 11 4; www.lolapaltinger.com.
        GISELA WILLIAMS
        FORAGING
      