
        After hearing the players' complaints over the composite basketball introduced by the N.B.A. this season, Commissioner David Stern finally gave up the fight yesterday.
        The league said it would go back to using leather balls Jan. 1. The announcement came a week after Stern said that he was wrong for not first soliciting his players' input and that he was re-evaluating the new basketball.
        ''Our players' response to this particular composite ball has been consistently negative, and we are acting accordingly,'' Stern said in a statement released by the league last night.
        The synthetic microfiber ball manufactured by Spalding, which also makes the leather basketball, had caused abrasions on players' and coaches' hands, a complaint the league could no longer ignore.
        Around locker rooms yesterday, players said they were pleased that they would soon be reunited with the familiar leather ball. Teams are in the process of sending their remaining leather balls -- those which were not yet donated as charity -- back to Spalding, to ensure they still fit the old specifications.
        ''Definitely happy to see we're going back to the old ball,'' the Knicks' Quentin Richardson said before a game against the Celtics last night. ''The new ball, as soon as it gets old and worn, it's just terrible. It gets slippery, you can't really grip it, it goes all over the place.''
        Richardson added, ''When so many people voiced their opinion that they don't like it, I mean, at the end of the day, it affects our work, it affects the way we play ball, so I think you had to listen to that.''
        The players union had registered an unfair labor practice petition with the National Labor Relations Board on Dec. 1, protesting that the league had not consulted its players before introducing the new ball. The N.B.A. sent each player a game ball last summer, but the decision to use the new ball had already been made.
        Stern acknowledged in an interview with The New York Times last Tuesday that not consulting players was a mistake; he indicated then that changes were coming. The switch to the leather ball was first reported on ESPN.com yesterday afternoon.
        ''I am definitely pleased and I think the players will be exhilarated,'' Billy Hunter, the executive director of the union, said in a telephone interview last night. ''It was the wise and prudent thing for David to do. Hopefully this will bring tranquillity back to the game.''
        Hunter said the union planned to withdraw its petition to the N.L.R.B., although it will keep in force a separate petition it filed maintaining that the league acted unilaterally in directing the referees to be more punitive toward players who complain to them.
        ''The turning factor was when we discovered that it was cutting the players' fingers,'' Hunter said. ''Jason Kidd, he was the first player to bring it to my attention. There was not a star player who did not complain about the ball.''
        Before the Nets' game against Memphis last night, Kidd said that he had had problems with the new ball and that he was pleased that the matter had been resolved. ''I'm happy to see it's not going to be an all-year thing of 'Do you like the new ball? Do you not like it?' '' Kidd said. ''I think the league is trying to do the right thing because they've heard the voice of a lot of the players.''
        Spalding has only 450 new leather balls in storage, according to several team officials told of the league's plan. Because teams must have 15 game balls available at their practice facilities and 15 for games, it will apparently take a couple of weeks to manufacture and gather enough new leather balls. As for changing balls again, Richardson said, ''I was able to adjust to this one as much as I didn't like it, so I think I'll be able to adjust back to the one I really liked, too.''
        The N.B.A. had said that it wanted to produce a ball that was more consistent in material. It also said leagues around the world were using a variation of synthetic material.
        ''Although testing performed by Spalding and the N.B.A. demonstrated that the new composite basketball was more consistent than leather, and statistically there has been an improvement in shooting, scoring, and ball-related turnovers, the most important statistic is the view of our players,'' Stern said.
        ''In the meantime, we will work with our players and our partners at Spalding to determine the best possible ball for the N.B.A.''
        Isiah Thomas, the Knicks' coach and president, said, ''Whatever ball we play with, I'm quite sure the players will adjust and we'll move on.''
        PRO BASKETBALL
      