
        Cincinnati Bengals (8-5) at Indianapolis Colts (10-3)  8:30 p.m. tomorrow
        What has happened to the mighty Colts? Yes, the defense is suspect, and the rushing defense is by far the worst in the N.F.L., allowing 176.5 yards a game, but that explosive offense had seemed more than enough to win.
        The reality is that the Colts, a month ago dreaming of an unbeaten season, may be fighting for a first-round playoff bye. This week, they get no relief, and maybe no victory, because the Bengals have won four straight games and think they can win out.
        The Colts' offense has scored 17 or fewer points in four of the last five games. The defense was horrible in last Sunday's 44-17 loss to the Jaguars. It gave up 375 yards rushing, prompting Jaguars defensive end to say Paul Spicer, ''I haven't seen anything like that since I watched NFL Films.''
        The Colts' remaining games are against the Texans and the Dolphins, two teams with losing records. The Bengals finish against the Broncos and the Steelers, two troublesome matchups. If the season ended now, the Bengals would have a wild-card berth.
        The Bengals' defense has given up only 17 points in the last three games. And despite a banged-up line, the offense has a strong passing game with a healthy Carson Palmer and outstanding receivers. One of those receivers, the ever-talkative Chad Johnson, has no doubt how this game will turn out.
        ''I know I'm a little ahead of myself, but once we get past Indy, I think we're kind of home free,'' he said. ''I don't care what nobody says.''
        Reporter's pick: Bengals
        Philadelphia Eagles (7-6) at Giants (7-6)  4:15 p.m.  These teams are tied for the lead in the National Football Conference wild-card race. Eagles Coach Andy Reid said, ''You get to December and you're still in the hunt, that's a good sign.'' The Eagles' defense is soft, with only eight sacks in the last eight games, although two interceptions of Jason Campbell helped provide a 21-19 victory over the Redskins last week. The Giants allowed the Panthers 463 yards in total offense and still won because the defense gave up only one touchdown.
        Giants
        Kansas City Chiefs (7-6) at San Diego Chargers (11-2)  8:15 p.m.  After the Chiefs hurt their wild-card chances by losing to the Ravens last week, defensive end Jared Allen said: ''I couldn't care less about the playoffs right now. We're trying to win some games.'' The Chargers have won seven straight and have the best record in the A.F.C. LaDainian Tomlinson has scored 29 touchdowns, a league record, and Coach Marty Schottenheimer said, ''I believe he is the finest running back to ever wear an N.F.L. uniform.''
        Chargers
        Jacksonville Jaguars (8-5) at Tennessee Titans (6-7)  1 p.m.  At the moment, the Jaguars are in position to win a wild card, and with their rushing game accounting for 375 yards in their 44-17 victory over the Colts last week, they are a threat against any defense. The Titans have won four games in a row, the last three with comebacks, and they already have more victories than they compiled in 2004 or 2005. After the Titans defeated the Texans, 26-20, on quarterback Vince Young's 39-yard run in overtime, Coach Jeff Fisher said, ''We're going to need a break here and there, and we got one.''
        Jaguars
        Pittsburgh Steelers (6-7) at Carolina Panthers (6-7)  1 p.m.  The Steelers have won four of five, but with three games left, their playoff chances are slim. Still, linebacker Joey Porter said, ''Until they tell us we're done, we're going to try to win all three games and see where that gets us.'' Last week, with Willie Parker running for 223 yards, the Steelers outrushed the Browns, 303 yards to 18. The Panthers have lost three games in a row and do not know if quarterback Jake Delhomme will be healthy or if Chris Weinke will start again.
        Steelers
        Jets (7-6) at Minnesota Vikings (6-7)  1 p.m.  In a loss to the Bills, the Jets gave up touchdowns on a 77-yard pass play, a 58-yard interception return and a 57-yard run. They could make the playoffs, or finish last in the A.F.C. East. Although the Vikings got by the Lions, Coach Brad Childress said, ''We're just fighting for a chance to just have a chance.''  Jets
        Cleveland Browns (4-9) at Baltimore Ravens (10-3)  1 p.m.  After beating the Chiefs last week, the Ravens can clinch a playoff berth with a victory over the Browns, and they are in good position for a first-round bye. Tackle Marvel Smith said after his Steelers crushed the Browns, ''You could hear them arguing among themselves.''
        Ravens
        Detroit Lions (2-11) at Green Bay Packers (5-8)  1 p.m.  The Lions made six turnovers in their 30-20 loss to the Vikings, and Detroit Coach Rod Marinelli said, ''We're not getting any better.'' Although the Packers beat the 49ers behind Brett Favre's touchdown passes of 68 and 36 yards and nine catches by Donald Driver, they badly need a makeover. Packers
        Houston Texans (4-9) at New England Patriots (9-4)  1 p.m.  This is the fifth losing season for the five-year-old Texans. When the Patriots were shut out by the Dolphins, Tom Brady endured four sacks and two fumbles. He screamed at teammates, and defensive end Kevin Carter of the Dolphins said, ''I've never seen him like that.''
        Patriots
        Miami Dolphins (6-7) at Buffalo Bills (6-7)  1 p.m.  The Dolphins have won five of their last six, most recently a shutout of the Patriots, but Coach Nick Saban warned, ''You can't relax.'' Certainly not in the cold of Buffalo. The Bills are 4-2 in their last six and have been tough against elite teams.
        Dolphins
        Tampa Bay Buccaneers (3-10) at Chicago Bears (11-2)  1 p.m.  The Bears have clinched the N.F.C. North title and a first-round playoff bye. The Buccaneers have no touchdowns in their last 11 quarters and are 0-6 in the N.F.C. South, but Coach Jon Gruden said: ''You've got to be a survivor. You've got to keep pushing.''
        Bears
        Washington Redskins (4-9) at New Orleans Saints (9-4)  1 p.m.  If the Saints win, they will clinch the N.F.C. South. After the way they manhandled the Cowboys in a 42-17 victory, they should win easily. After losing to the Eagles, Redskins cornerback Carlos Rogers said: ''Same old story the whole year. We can't play a whole game.''
        Saints
        Denver Broncos (7-6) at Arizona Cardinals (4-9)  4:05 p.m.  The Broncos have lost four straight, and Darrent Williams, a young, disillusioned cornerback, said: ''Some people are ready to hang it up. You can tell.'' In upsetting the Seahawks, the Cardinals made sure the rookie quarterback Matt Leinart was not sacked.
        Broncos
        St. Louis Rams (5-8) at Oakland Raiders (2-11)  4:15 p.m.  With a good passer in Marc Bulger and a pounding runner in Steven Jackson, the Rams have underachieved. The Raiders have the least-productive offense in the American Football Conference, but quarterback Aaron Brooks insists, ''We're not as bad as people think we are.''
        Raiders
        PRO FOOTBALL
      