
        Undrafted and relatively unknown, receiver Wallace Wright does not grace the Jets' active roster because of any grand design. He is there because he has quietly made himself difficult to ignore.
        Wright walked on at North Carolina and started one game in four seasons as a kick returner and receiver. He was the N.F.L.'s equivalent of a walk-on, traveling to New York in May from his family's home in Fayetteville, N.C., for a three-day tryout. That led to a three-year contract and a spot on the Jets' practice squad.
        On Dec. 2, he was elevated to the active roster after the veteran receiver Tim Dwight was placed on injured reserve. Wright, 22, made his N.F.L. debut by playing on special teams at Green Bay and followed that with a repeat performance at home last Sunday against Buffalo.
        Sitting on a stool in front of his locker this week, wedged between the veterans Shaun Ellis on his left and Chad Pennington on his right, Wright looked and sounded a little awestruck.
        ''It was quite an experience to be out there and shake Brett Favre's hand after the game,'' he said. ''I think last weekend's game I was a little bit more amped up because it was my first home game.''
        On the Jets' first punt against the Bills, Wright tackled the returner Roscoe Parrish in the open field for a 1-yard loss. It was one of the few Jets highlights in the 31-13 loss.
        ''He's got a very good motor, and I like his toughness,'' Jets Coach Eric Mangini said. He added that Wright hastened his promotion by making his presence felt every day at practice with his consistent, conscientious approach. ''He didn't allow us not to see him,'' Mangini said.
        If he plays Sunday at Minnesota, Wright will officially be recognized by the N.F.L., which includes in its pension plan any player who has appeared in three games.
        ''That is a big deal,'' Wright said. ''But really, I just want to play. I'm not thinking about retirement.''
        He was forced to briefly consider it when he broke his leg in the next-to-last game of his senior season at North Carolina. ''I think it hit him then, 'I'm never going to play again,' '' his father, Wallace Wright Sr., said in a telephone interview.
        Wright put in long hours rehabilitating his leg and managed to make it to the scouting combine in February, when he was timed in 4.5 seconds for the 40-yard dash. That was not half bad given his circumstances but apparently not good enough to impress scouts.
        When he was not drafted, Wright again had to consider that his football career might be over. A day and a half passed before he received a call from the Jets inviting him to a Mother's Day weekend tryout.
        The Jets were not among the teams that Wright had been in contact with in the weeks leading up to the draft. It is unclear how he happened to appear on their radar, though the elder Wright said he knew that a friend of his from college who lives in Albany sent the Jets a highlight tape.
        Mangini was coy when asked about the tape. ''We do get quite a bit of mail every day,'' he said, smiling. ''I get letters all the time from moms and dads, uncles, cousins. They reference the fact that I was a ball boy, someone had to give me the opportunity.''
        Before he became an overnight success story, Wright was overlooked time and again, first by college recruiters, then by the North Carolina coaches and again by all the N.F.L. teams during the draft. It was difficult for his father to fathom. Wallace Sr. had been an outstanding athlete in his day, someone who never had to work hard at getting noticed.
        As a high school quarterback in Florida, he attracted the attention of coaches at Purdue, who recruited him to play receiver. Wallace Sr. decided that if he could not play quarterback, he would rather play baseball.
        He was drafted by the Montreal Expos as an infielder and spent four years (1970-73) playing minor league ball in a number of towns, including Jamestown, N.Y., where Larry Parrish was a teammate and Walt Hriniak was the manager. He advanced to the Class AA level before giving up his major league dream to become a full-time teacher and coach.
        When Wright played on special teams at North Carolina as a true freshman and still was not awarded a scholarship, his father had to bite his tongue to keep from meddling.
        ''It wasn't about the money; I wanted him to belong,'' said Wallace Sr., who knew what it was like to be on a team but slightly apart from it.
        He reached adulthood in a world divided by color. During his years in pro baseball, Wallace Sr. said, he was not always welcome in the boardinghouses and the hotels where his white teammates stayed. So it pained him to see his son, as a walk-on, set apart from the scholarship athletes in ways both subtle and plain.
        Wright, though, did not act aggrieved. Not being rewarded only made him more resilient. In his junior year, he finally was granted a football scholarship, and here he is, not quite three years later, playing in the N.F.L.
        ''During the Green Bay game, I was watching him on television,'' Wallace Sr. said. ''And I was thinking what a success story this is. A little kid who never really got his just due on the athletic field, and he's made his way to the N.F.L.''
        PRO FOOTBALL
      