
        In an indication that parents and the school system may be trying to negotiate a compromise on the city's ban on cellphones in the schools, a court hearing on a suit challenging the ban was postponed yesterday.
        At the request of the parents, the city has agreed to postpone any court action for a month, while the school system considers a plan to allow students to pay to check their cellphones at the schoolhouse door.
        David Cantor, a spokesman for Chancellor Joel I. Klein, said yesterday that the school system stood by the cellphone ban. But the Department of Education said earlier this week that it was considering whether to hire a private vendor to store students' cellphones in small lockers outside schools for a fee of 25 to 50 cents a day.
        ''The revelation that the Department of Education is exploring a pilot project with lockers confirms what the parents have been saying all along: that there are reasonable alternatives to the total ban,'' Norman Siegel, a lawyer for parents who have brought the court challenge, said after a brief hearing yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
        However, one mother who attended yesterday's court hearing said there was widespread opposition to the storage proposal from parents who want their children to be able to take phones into school with them as long as they do not use them during school hours. The mother also said there is a thriving underground market in cellphone storage, with some bodegas in Queens stashing students' phones in brown paper bags for $1 to $4 a day.
        The mother, Rebecca Daniels, who is also a member of the community education council for District 2 in Manhattan, said that forcing children to pay to store their cellphones would discriminate against poorer families.
        Dina Paul Parks, a spokeswoman for the Department of Education, said the school system would not be responsible for the storage, even though it would hire the private vendor. ''The lockers are not a D.O.E. project,'' she said. ''It will be designed by a vendor, maintained by a vendor. All liability and all revenue will be maintained by the vendor.''
        Ms. Daniels, who has two children in public schools, accused the city of putting money before safety. ''For a vendor to capitalize on our children at the same time that we are supporting free lunch in the schools is putting a price on our children's safety,'' she said.
      