
        Don Nelson packed up his white Ford pickup truck in Dallas in September, threw in a box of cigars and some country CDs, and headed for old Route 66 to trace history: his own.
        Larry Riley, Nelson's friend and assistant coach, sat in the passenger seat. Lucky, the Jack Russell terrier mix Nelson rescued from a shelter near his off-season home in Maui, sat in the cab.
        Talking basketball for 14 hours a day through a thick cloud of smoke, Nelson saw his plan clearer than ever. ''We can do this,'' he proclaimed to Lucky, Riley and the tumbleweeds as he delineated his offense and defense while passing through Amarillo, Tex., and Gallup, N.M., before finally arriving in Oakland, Calif., for his new, and yet old, job.
        Nelson returned to the Golden State Warriors, whom he coached from 1989 to 1995, and to the N.B.A. after a strained 18-month absence from the Dallas Mavericks that also gave him a regenerating vacation in places like New Zealand.
        ''Some people question, How does a 66-year-old guy who could easily walk off into the sunset do this?'' Riley said in Oakland last week. ''Because it's right in his heart. It's what he wants to do.''
        The man known as Nellie wanted to show that his journey in the N.B.A. -- spanning 30 years on the sideline and 14 in uniform -- was not yet complete. He returned because he missed teaching, wanted the challenge of reviving a franchise and craved competition.
        ''The N.B.A. is the major leagues,'' Nelson said between puffs of a cigar atop the Warriors' practice facility. ''It's the fast lane and it's fun to be in it.''
        That is a perfect summary of Nelson's philosophy. It may not have earned him an N.B.A. title, but it has won him 1,202 games, second most on the career list.
        ''He's given me something to be happy about playing basketball again,'' Warriors guard Baron Davis said.
        That was before Nelson, by not calling a timeout with eight seconds left, allowed Davis to race upcourt to hit the winning 3-pointer against Houston on Thursday.
        ''He's so far ahead of everyone in his knowledge,'' Davis said. ''It's like art, the way he structures the game. The way he coached in Dallas, he revolutionized the game.''
        With revolution comes struggle, however, and Nelson's fast and furious style -- which matched his big-hearted, blustering and blunt personality -- has created controversy as well as victory.
        He gained attention at Golden State in the early 1990s by popularizing Run TMC, the high-scoring threesome of Tim Hardaway, Mitch Richmond and Chris Mullin.
        By the end of Nelson's run with the Warriors, he publicly feuded with his star, Chris Webber. Webber was traded, and Nelson was fired, then Nelson entered into a legal dispute with the owner, Chris Cohan, over money owed. (Long settled, Nelson called it ''part of business.'')
        Nelson moved to New York in 1995, but his offense and stubbornness never meshed with the Knicks, especially with their franchise player, Patrick Ewing. Nelson lost that power struggle after only 59 games.
        Nelson found revival in Dallas. He jump-started the careers of Steve Nash and Dirk Nowitzki, infusing the team with 3-point fever and 50-victory seasons. But his relationship with the team's new owner, Mark Cuban, grew tense, even with Nelson's son Donnie as the Mavericks' president.
        Don Nelson groomed his assistant Avery Johnson to be a head coach and stepped aside in March 2005. Nelson remained a consultant, but from a distance. (He has since gone to arbitration over deferred payments he says Cuban owes him.)
        ''I thought I'd be the Red Auerbach of that franchise, just end up being an adviser,'' Nelson said of his former mentor with the Celtics. ''Mark didn't want that.''
        Mullin, in his third year as the Warriors' vice president for basketball operations, had a solution. He called Nelson, his own mentor, in Maui to ask him to save a moribund franchise that had been through eight coaches and made no playoff appearances since Nelson's departure.
        ''I didn't want to go into another situation that didn't work, so I was careful,'' Nelson said. ''I needed to have the basketball people make the basketball decisions and somebody I could communicate with.''
        Mullin has credited Nelson for saving him by sending him to alcohol rehabilitation; the two have a bond that needs no explanation.
        ''Nellie makes me laugh all the time,'' Mullin said. ''He's doing wonderful things and we're moving forward. We are a young team; he's introducing and teaching an N.B.A. style. Nellie and I believe in that style.''
        Nelson made it his goal to develop coaching talent. ''I want to make Keith Smart a head coach like I did with Avery,'' Nelson said of the assistant he inherited.
        In 1988, Nelson drafted Smart but cut him, explaining that he was not good enough.
        ''I always use that lesson of honesty in tough situations,'' said Smart, who became an interim coach in Cleveland in 2000.
        Opponents are seeing vintage Nellie Ball again from the Warriors (12-12): small lineups, position-defying matchups, passes off the backboard, centers making 3-pointers, intentional fouling, gamesmanship, gimmicks.
        ''He's fun for basketball, very creative,'' San Antonio Coach Gregg Popovich, Nelson's friend and former assistant, said last week in Los Angeles. ''He's going to look at his group and do what it has to to win that game that night.''
        Nelson admitted that his team was ''not very good yet,'' adding that he was wrong about some players he had evaluated. But his eyes lit up when he talked about the 21-year-old center Andris Biedrins and the 20-year-old guard Monta Ellis, who rarely played under the previous coach, Mike Montgomery.
        ''I wasn't wrong about them,'' Nelson said.
        Nor was he wrong about the journeyman forward Matt Barnes, whom he encouraged to shoot 3-pointers.
        ''This is the first coach who really believed in me,'' said Barnes, who almost quit for a football career until training camp.
        In Tuesday's 126-113 victory against Sacramento, Barnes, once a 20-percent 3-point shooter, was 6 for 9 from beyond the arc and scored a career-high 32 points.
        ''This is what makes my job a wonderful job,'' Nelson said, beaming like a parent. ''He's coming into his own.''
        Nelson won his 1,200th game Dec. 9 at home, celebrating with just one cigar and one beer because he has gout. The next day, the Warriors scored 72 first-half points against Seattle but lost by 2.
        ''Not to be able to enjoy that for a few days is the nature of the business we're in,'' Nelson said. ''It was history, see you later, probably as it should be.''
        Nelson's patience and the Warriors' talent will be tested on their six-game trip, which stops in New Jersey tomorrow night.
        Nelson has a three-year, $18 million contract and is not sure how long he will keep coaching. ''I don't have to do it a lifetime,'' he said, even if he has already found perspective in doing so.
        Mullin said: ''Nellie, no matter what he's engaged in, he wants to win. I can't say he's mellowed, but he might mask it a little better.''
        Being in remission from prostate cancer -- his wife, Joy, is also in remission, from breast cancer -- has only intensified Nelson's passion for life and culture, and his compassion for people and animals.
        While Nelson was recovering from surgery in the winter of 2001, he visited the pound every day in Maui, bonding with Lucky. ''That was the only good thing about having cancer,'' Nelson said.
        Lucky made himself at home in the Warriors' offices, winning over staff members who had not known Nelson.
        ''He really aided in my being accepted,'' Nelson said. ''I guess they all liked the dog and figured the old man can't be that bad.''
        PRO BASKETBALL
      