
        If the Nets are to find themselves one step at a time, consider Monday night's game against the Golden State Warriors to be a lesson in fourth-quarter execution.
        After they were outhustled and struggled to find a rhythm on offense for 36 minutes, the Nets shored up their defense and found their range in the fourth quarter to beat the Warriors, 105-97, and snap a two-game losing streak.
        It was a refreshing change from the Nets' recent fourth-quarter troubles. Against the Detroit Pistons on Saturday night, the score was tied at 82-82 with two and a half minutes to play, but the Nets were held scoreless for the rest of the game, and lost by 8 points.
        ''That's a very important step for us,'' small forward Richard Jefferson said of the Nets' fourth-quarter execution against the Warriors.
        Jefferson, who struggled for much of the game, had a couple of important baskets and a crucial steal in the fourth quarter to finish with 15 points.
        Point guard Jason Kidd (10 points, 12 assists, 11 rebounds) was consistent throughout the game and recorded his sixth triple-double of the season, the 81st of his career. No other player in the league has more than one triple-double this season.
        Center Nenad Krstic was an offensive sparkplug from start to finish, finishing with 26 points and 14 rebounds. The Nets (10-14) made it a point to go to the 7-foot Krstic because he was one of the biggest players on the court among the Warriors' small lineup.
        ''He was the tallest thing out there, so it was a lot of pressure on him, just not offensively but defensively, too,'' Kidd said. ''He stepped up and played a great game.''
        Krstic's offensive prowess helped make up for another anemic game on offense by Vince Carter, who scored 11 points. Carter entered the game averaging 26.5 points and had scored 12 points in each of the Nets' previous two games.
        Carter had a timely 3-pointer in the fourth quarter, but the Nets won the game mostly on the strength of a pair of reserves, Mikki Moore and Bostjan Nachbar.
        Moore scored 6 of his 9 points in the fourth quarter, and Nachbar had 9 of his 13 points in the last period.
        The Nets jumped on the Warriors (12-14) in the fourth quarter by outscoring them by 19-4 in the first seven minutes. The zone defense that the Warriors used for the entire game no longer appeared to faze the Nets.
        Moore scored 6 consecutive points early in the quarter. After a layup and a free throw by Nachbar, Jefferson hit a jump shot. On the Warriors' next possession, Jefferson stole the ball from Baron Davis, who led the Warriors with 25 points, as Davis was driving the lane. That led to a pair of free throws for Jefferson.
        Carter then hit a pair of free throws and a 3-pointer to put the Nets ahead, 100-91, with four and a half minutes to play.
        The Warriors just about did themselves in when guard Monta Ellis threw a bad pass that Nachbar picked off with about two minutes to play. The Nets led by 101-94.
        It was an especially pleasing game for Nachbar, who had fallen out of the rotation after playing significant minutes early in the season.
        ''It's not easy to be patient,'' Nachbar said. ''I'm glad that I was able to stay ready.''
        The Nets set the tone in the fourth quarter with a better effort on defense, slowing the Warriors' transition attack, which had led to many easy baskets.
        The Warriors, who lead the league in fast-break points, had 35 in the game, but only 4 in the fourth quarter. The Nets also held Golden State to 4 points in the lane and 31.3 percent shooting in the fourth quarter.
        ''We just didn't have anything left in the fourth quarter,'' Warriors Coach Don Nelson said. ''It certainly wasn't our defense. It was our offense. We stopped penetrating, doing the things to get easy baskets and running.''
        For Coach Lawrence Frank, the Nets' one quarter of excellence was enough to help him breathe easier amid a frustrating season.
        ''It wasn't a Picasso,'' he said. ''But it's a win, and we have to continue to improve.''
        REBOUNDS
        The Nets rookie power forward Josh Boone was out with a migraine.  Lawrence Frank started the swingman Antoine Wright in place of power forward Jason Collins to match the Warriors' small lineup.  The Nets rookie swingman Hassan Adams scored 6 points in his first five minutes Monday night and finished with 10 points and 6 rebounds.
        PRO BASKETBALL
      