
        In one 24-hour period in New Haven just after Thanksgiving, four people were shot in separate incidents and one died. Although overall crime in New Haven is down significantly from a decade ago, the level of violent crimes in the city -- particularly crimes in which juveniles are either victims or perpetrators -- has everyone worried.
        That is why the city is debating so strenuously whether to impose a teenage curfew of 10 o'clock to combat juvenile crime. There have been crowded hearings and strong opinions voiced on both sides. But if a curfew alone were the answer to juvenile crime, every city in the country would have one. There is little evidence that a curfew reduces juvenile delinquency. Curfews have not been a success in other cities without significant increases in accompanying services and interventions in the lives of troubled teenagers.
        Yet there is no doubt that the city needs to act. In June, police charged four teenagers with being involved in killing 13-year-old Jajuana Cole. Justus Suggs, also 13, died two months later as he rode his bike home from a carnival. There have been 22 homicides in the city so far this year, far outpacing last year's 15.
        Mayor John DeStefano points out that there are 9,000 teenagers in New Haven, and the vast majority cause no problems. The few hundred who are involved in crime often have no structure at home, access to guns and little ability to control their behavior. The most frightening incidents have involved teenagers shooting others for the most trivial of reasons.
        New Haven is one of the poorest cities not just in the state, but also in the country. Yet it is working hard to address juvenile crime. At Yale University, researchers are working to analyze the specific nature of the problem and how to solve it. Several schools already run after-school programs until 7 p.m. The city plans to hire 85 police officers in the next three years to increase community law enforcement.
        New Haven is burdened, as are all cities in the state, with a large number of poor people (more than one-third the city's population) and a large amount of tax-exempt property, hampering its ability to raise revenue. The state spends millions of dollars in social services in the city, and it is up to Connecticut to be a constructive partner with the city in fixing its problems. Too often, the state spends money on services of no proven effectiveness. Services that do not work are a waste of money, both for New Haven and state taxpayers. And it would be better if more services addressed families, not just individuals.
        The curfew debate has exposed New Haven's problems and its many assets. In the end, the most effective curfews are those that families impose, not governments. The more that the city's families can be strengthened, the better off New Haven will be.
        Connecticut
      