
        Camille A. Brown is tiny and just 27, but she is clearly a force of nature. Unlike many company debuts, at which the work looks a little thin (it's not easy to make an hour's worth of choreography, even bad choreography), Friday night's program by her new group, Camille A. Brown and Dancers, was almost too full. In addition to seven pieces of her own at the Joyce SoHo, she showed solos by Darrell Grand Moultrie and Roger C. Jeffrey, and featured the poet Aja-Monet Bacquie and two drummers, Ray Phillip and Farai Malianga.
        The evening opened with an introduction by Sylvia Waters, artistic director of Ailey II. Then came a solo, ''Dementia's Serenity,'' created and danced by Ms. Brown to Beethoven's ''Moonlight'' Sonata. It wasn't the strongest work of the evening, but it demonstrated Ms. Brown's intensity as a dancer, and the physical traits -- sudden, abrupt transitions; falls to the floor and upright recovery; detailed play with the hands -- that characterized her choreography throughout the evening.
        Like Ronald K. Brown and a whole line of black choreographers, Ms. Brown presents the dancing body as a vehicle for overt religious celebration. (She is no relation to Mr. Brown, but she dances with his company.) And like Mr. Brown, she mixes modern dance techniques with West African dance elements. But her personal physical style, with its focused bursts of energy and frozen positions that explode into motion, colors her group works very differently.
        In ''Shelter of Presence,'' ''Wait a Minute!'' (performed by five dancers from Urban Bush Women, which commissioned the work) and ''New Second Line'' she uses this stop-and-go dynamic to continuously change the configurations of synchronized group movement to sophisticated effect.
        Occasionally those works got a little blurry, although the high-energy dancing was always fun to watch in the close-up view afforded by a small black-box theater. But there wasn't a wasted moment or gesture in ''More Time Than Anybody,'' a dramatically brilliant, physically exhilarating and utterly hilarious portrait of a group waiting for a subway train, set to Ray Charles's ''What'd I Say'' and one of the most enjoyable, inventive dances I've seen this year.
        DANCE REVIEW
      