
        The Senate Judiciary Committee plans to create a Subcommittee on Human Rights and the Law to examine issues like torture, war crimes and human trafficking, the incoming chairman of the panel said on Wednesday.
        In a speech outlining an agenda of ''restoration, repair and renewal,'' the new chairman, Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, said that the new subcommittee would bring a focus to efforts to protect civil liberties.
        The announcement seemed to underscore Mr. Leahy's intention to use oversight more aggressively than Republicans had.
        ''This has been an unfortunate chapter in Congress's history,'' Mr. Leahy said of the recent years of Republican control.
        ''I have never seen a Congress so willfully derelict in its duties as during this administration,'' he added.
        Mr. Leahy, in an appearance at the Georgetown University law school, accused the White House of ''corrosive unilateralism'' in refusing to cooperate with Congress. After the September 2001 attacks, he said, ''the White House accelerated its power plays at the expense of the other branches of government -- all in the name of fighting terrorism.''
        The Bush administration, Mr. Leahy said, had ''brazenly refused to answer the legitimate oversight questions of the public's duly elected representatives and it has acted outside the lawful authority to wiretap Americans without warrants and to create databanks and dossiers on law-abiding Americans without following the law and without seeking legal authorization.''
        He said the administration had made judicial appointments for ''partisan political purposes and refused to work with us on consensus nominees.'' Bipartisan nominating commissions should be considered to screen judicial candidates, Mr. Leahy said.
        A spokesman for the Justice Department, Brian Roehrkasse, said in a statement, ''As we have in the past six years, we're looking forward to working with the Senate Judiciary Committee, including working with the committee to provide information that it legitimately needs.''
        ''In the past we've reached accommodations on working together,'' Mr. Roehrkasse said; ''we expect we can do so in the future as well.''
        Conservative groups quickly issued statements denouncing Mr. Leahy's speech. Curt Levey, executive director of the Committee for Justice, said, ''When Mr. Leahy speaks of wanting 'consensus' judicial nominees, what he appears to have in mind are nominees that are acceptable to the coalition of ultra-liberal groups that have orchestrated much of the opposition to the president's judicial picks.''
        At times, Mr. Leahy's speech was combative.
        ''This election was an intervention,'' he said. ''The American people rose up to take away Congress's rubber stamp and demand a new direction with more accountability.''
        Mr. Leahy promised aggressive efforts on a wide array of subjects, among them privacy, information technology, war profiteering in Iraq, judicial selection, searches without warrants, civil rights, the treatment of terrorism suspects, immigration and patent reform.
        With jurisdiction over hotly debated national security issues and judicial appointments, the committee is a potential flashpoint between Democrats and the Bush administration. Mr. Leahy said he hoped for cooperation, but would issue subpoenas if the administration refused the committee's requests for information.
      