
        Has an edict gone out to costume designers for new works commissioned by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater demanding that all the women be garbed in white nightdresses?
        On Friday night at City Center the company offered a premiere by Uri Sands, a former Ailey dancer who is now artistic director of his own company, TU Dance, along with his wife, Toni Pierce-Sands. The new piece, ''Existence Without Form,'' followed Ronald K. Brown's ''Ife/My Heart,'' which features women in flouncy white dresses by Omatayo Wunmi Olaiya. When the curtain went up on ''Existence,'' there the dresses were again, except these were designed by Tulle & Dye.
        Perhaps everyone's image of the Ailey company is the women in frilly, full-skirted white in Alvin Ailey's ''Revelations'' (the closing work on Friday's program). A notion of the company's identity also bleeds into the choreography it commissions. Mr. Brown's ''Ife/My Heart,'' created for the Ailey company last year, provides a ''Revelations''-like theme of spiritual seeking and solace in community through sometimes formulaic African-dance-inspired arm-lashing, leg-wheeling, torso-convulsing movement.
        ''Existence Without Form'' is given an equally committed performance, and it feels thematically similar, if less formally coherent. The opening reveals seven dancers facing upstage, illuminated from above by Al Crawford's initially somber lighting. (The women are in those dresses, the men bare-chested in light-colored pants.) A commissioned score by Christian Matjias provides melancholy, meandering piano music, and the dancers first move quietly, then plunge into sequences of wheeling turns and busy individual activity that feels like a rehearsal free-for-all.
        A subsequent duet for Asha Thomas and Jamar Roberts offers deliberately ungainly, tangled connections that feel more awkward than evocative. And a skittering dance for Hope Boykin and Dwana Adiaha Smallwood has a contrived girlishness that sits oddly on these dancers.
        Most successful is the last section, with Ms. Thomas and the four men (Mr. Roberts, Matthew Rushing, Glenn Allen Sims and Abdur-Rahim Jackson) dancing in concert, or working in sweeping canonical sequences, before Ms. Boykin and Ms. Smallwood run on, leaping between their suddenly frozen bodies. Finally Mr. Sands appears to be creating real choreographic structures -- existence with form -- and even a little poetry.
        The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater performs through Dec. 31 at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan; alvinailey.org or (212) 581-1212.
        DANCE REVIEW
      