
        In his years as a Citigroup executive, Robert Druskin earned a reputation as a strong manager with as little tolerance for excuses as for expenses. He vigilantly monitored use of cabs, for instance, and once was astounded to learn that a manager had spent $8,000 on pens for an awards program. The program was quickly ended.
        Now, as Citigroup's new chief operating officer, Mr. Druskin, 59, will put that reputation to work. He is the point man in creating what Charles O. Prince III, chairman and chief executive, promised yesterday would be a ''leaner, thinner Citigroup'' that would win over frustrated investors.
        ''This is going to be a very important initiative,'' Mr. Prince said at the company's year-end presentation for Wall Street analysts and investors. ''We'll eliminate layers of activity that clog up the system.''
        Mr. Druskin has barely settled into his new job, but as the new expense-control czar, his first project seems like a natural: look for ways to flush out big expenses. Citigroup is under pressure from investors to improve its stock price, which has barely moved since Mr. Prince took the helm three years ago, and has badly underperformed its peers.
        Citigroup shares have risen 13 percent over the last three years, for example, while Bank of America's stock price has increased 34 percent.
        Significant investments in 1,100 new branches, more than 70 percent of them in developing countries, are not expected to pay off for a while, and a major overhaul of the consumer businesses' computer systems will take at least four more years.
        Citigroup has also been hamstrung by what many Wall Street analysts say has been a failure to manage its operational expenses. Through the first three quarters, the company's costs rose nearly 7 percent, nearly 40 percent higher than revenue growth, according to a Merrill Lynch study that excluded investment spending.
        ''When you put it in the context of all the other large-cap banks, there are very few that have that bad operating leverage,'' said Guy Moszkowski, the Merrill Lynch analyst who issued the report. ''Citigroup's cost management has not been as good as they have been famous for in the past. It has slipped.''
        In his presentation yesterday, Mr. Prince described plans to overhaul Citigroup's consumer businesses in the United States while expanding aggressively overseas. But Mr. Prince appeared to tweak the company's strategy, cutting plans for investment spending next year almost in half, by about $500 million, while ramping up for smaller acquisitions. And he put significant emphasis on the cost-cutting effort, noting that Citigroup's transformation was a long-term project.
        ''I wish there was a magic wand or a shortcut,'' Mr. Prince said, ''but there is no easy way of getting from here to there.''
        Mr. Druskin said in an interview yesterday that he was focused on having concrete ideas by the end of the March, the company's first fiscal quarter. He is looking at cutting back-office costs, identifying less-expensive business centers and streamlining duplicate operations.
        He acknowledged that he might have earned a reputation as a careful observer of even minor expenses. ''People find out that expenses are being watched,'' he said. ''It's the message you send, not the 8 bucks.''
        Whether or not he can find enough savings to truly improve the banking giant's profits remains an open question, even among some analysts who viewed the announcement as positive. But Mr. Druskin, who has worked at Citigroup and its predecessor for 15 years, said, ''My gut tells me there is plenty.''
        ''What I am going to do is try to figure out how to reduce those business-as-usual expenses and really protect the investment spending we have under way,'' Mr. Druskin said. ''It is a large and complicated place, but there are opportunities to get the expense base down.''
        In tapping Mr. Druskin, Mr. Prince has chosen not only a capable lieutenant but also someone he calls his ''friend for 1,000 years.'' They developed a close relationship in late 2002 and 2003 when they were paired in a similar arrangement at Citigroup's corporate and investment bank after a scandal involving bank research.
        As the head of the investment bank, Mr. Prince began overhauling its compliance practices and client strategies while Mr. Druskin, the unit's chief operating officer, attended to the financial details and daily business decisions.
        ''When everyone thought our job was to deal with the regulatory problems, our job was really to change'' the investment bank, Mr. Prince recalled.
        Mr. Druskin added, ''The chemistry was very good.''
        ''When confronted with a problem, we will often reach a similar conclusion,'' he said. ''When we don't, he is very open to different points of view.''
        When Mr. Prince was named chief executive of the entire company in 2003, Mr. Druskin took over as head of the corporate bank, a title he will retain, to smooth the transition of two younger executives, Michael S. Klein and Thomas G. Maheras, who will run the daily operations.
        At Citigroup, he has served in a variety of roles, from head of operations and technology to running businesses like asset management and Smith Barney.
        ''He is not one of these guys that flies at 50,000 feet,'' noted William J. Mills II, the head of the corporate and investment bank's Europe, Middle East and Africa regions. ''He gets down in the trenches and understands, what is driving the business, what are the resources, and what are the challenges and opportunities.''
        Growing up in Englewood, N.J., Mr. Druskin said he had no idea he would end up in banking. But a few years after graduating from Rutgers University in 1969, the brokerage firm where he found a job was snapped up by Sanford I. Weill, Citigroup's founder.
        While Mr. Weill engineered the financial terms of more than 100 deals, Mr. Druskin was responsible for consolidating the back-office and computer systems and finding cost savings -- the same duties his new position will require.
        An avid reader with eclectic tastes, Mr. Druskin finds places on his night table for books as diverse as ''Eragon,'' the young adult fantasy book, and Daniel Yergin's books. Mr. Druskin also has what friends call a wickedly dry sense of humor.
        As Smith Barney's chief administrative officer in the mid-1990s, for example, he once had had a colleague deliver an official-looking document to a promising young executive to convince him he had failed a licensing exam. Only after the young man turned white did Mr. Druskin let him know the truth: his career was not going to be derailed.
        Today, that young executive holds a top position at one of the big global banks.
      