
        MAGAZINES are filled to the brim with their usual best-of-the-year compilations. But what is surprising this year are the lists from publications that usually do not write much about commerce.
        For example, in Scientific American's ''50 for 2006,'' the magazine singled out Swiss Re, the insurance giant, saying the company had a ''history of sensitivity to climate change concerns.'' Three years ago the company ''announced it was establishing a 10-year plan to become greenhouse 'neutral,' meaning it would reduce or offset the net carbon emissions of its employees to zero.''
        The magazine also praised a California businessman, Scott Johnson, who is waging a personal battle against multiple sclerosis. ''His Myelin Repair Foundation has persuaded five of the field's top university researchers to merge their laboratories and create a more businesslike plan for developing treatments.''
        Philanthropist-billionaires Warren E. Buffett and Paul Allen were also featured.
        Among Esquire's ''Best and Brightest 2006'' is Eric Loewen, a nuclear engineer who is heading General Electric's participation in the Energy Department's Global Nuclear Energy Partnership. It aims to ''expand nuclear power while significantly reducing the long-term's nuclear-waste issue by shortening the waste's half life.''
        Also praised were the creators of ZEUS Football, a play-calling software program ''that combines game theory, computer modeling and a massive N.F.L. statistics database to provide coaches with recommendations on critical calls''; and Philip Rosedale who created Second Life, a three-dimensional digital world.
        SURVIVING ENRON -- The advice about what it takes for a corporation to succeed is exactly what you would expect from a chief executive: Identify and build on your core strengths; remain true to your values; your employees really are your most important asset; and ''don't trade long-term success for short-term goals.''
        But this time the guidance is coming from an unlikely source, Peggy Fowler, chief executive of Portland General Electric, ''one of the only surviving assets of the Enron estate.''
        Enron bought Portland General Electric in July 1997 for $3.1 billion but the Oregon Public Utility Commission ''had the foresight to write rules that kept the company whole, and protected its assets from seizure from the courts,'' as one of the conditions of approving the acquisition, Ms. Fowler writes in Worth, where she describes what it was like to be part of Enron.
        ''The brash style of many Enron executives seemed a stark contrast to the highly talented, yet modest, P.G.E. team,'' she writes.
        In the first-person article, she makes it clear that she is happy to get the last word, pointing out that in contrast to its former parent, the publicly held Portland General Electric is thriving. ''Our financial ratings are investment grade and our balance sheet is strong,'' she said.
        SOFT NUMBERS -- More than half of chief financial officers say they can legally influence reported earnings by 3 percent or more. So reports Don Durfee in CFO who adds the officers said the manipulation was simple to pull off.
        Techniques could range from ''such time-honored tactics'' as delaying spending and accelerating order processing, to more subtle accounting moves.
        ''If your percentage of sales uncollectible could fall anywhere between 2.1 and 2.5 percent with equal likelihood, you might choose 2.1 percent if you wanted to increase earnings,'' says Michael Peters of the Villanova University School of Business, who along with Rich Houston of the University of Alabama and Jamie Pratt of Indiana University surveyed 743 senior finance professionals worldwide. ''When presented with various scenarios in which their companies would either beat or miss analyst expectations, a third of respondents said they would try to influence the results,'' Mr. Durfee writes.
        Few of the finance chiefs thought that their auditors would catch any such manipulations, and even if they did, they did not think the auditors would report it to management.
        FINAL TAKE -- This just in from the priorities department, courtesy of Money (citing research from AllianceBernstein):
        Some 58 percent of parents ''spent more on restaurants and takeout last year than they saved for college.''
        PAUL B. BROWN
        WHAT'S OFFLINE
      