
        Some like it new and some like it rehabbed.
        Here in Istanbul, two multimillion-dollar projects exemplify the wide range of high-end living: the sleek new residences at Kanyon that rise above the Levent neighborhood, and the 19th century Rizzo and Kamondo buildings that have been given a second life near the bustling district of Beyoglu.
        The projects could not be more different and yet each has sold out, or close to it, at individual prices in the millions of dollars -- noteworthy in a country where the average income hovers around $5,000.
        The 179 Kanyon apartments are part of a 21st century mixed-use project on a grand scale: a complex that includes a four-level shopping mall, 26-story office building and nine-screen movie theater, all nestled in an area known for office towers and traffic jams.
        The complex's self-contained neighborhood is ''a way to bridge the gap between city and suburbs, a chance to be in the thick of things in a quality environment but also have access to a community feeling,'' said Markus Lehto, 33, the Kanyon chief executive. ''You can come out here and walk your dog and still be just steps away from an amazing array'' of 160 shops and more than 30 restaurants.
        When Mr. Lehto and colleagues were planning the complex, which opened June 1, ''we tried to look at the things that were missing in the Istanbul market and think of that in terms of the habits of the Turkish people,'' he said. ''We found that for a city this size, the number of places like Beyoglu, Nisantasi or the seaside, where you can walk outside safely on comfortable streets, can be counted on a few fingers.''
        The $200 million project was a joint venture of Eczacibasi Holding, one of the giant family-run companies of Turkey and Is Real Estate Investment Trust, a division of Is Bank, the largest Turkish bank by assets.
        ''What Kanyon has done is that it has created a lifestyle,'' said Cindy Ashaboglu, a real estate agent in the fashionable Nisantasi section of the city. ''Turkey is really ready for that now. The new generation of Turks that have gone abroad to study and live, and to work in corporate environments have brought a little piece of that culture back to Turkey and these people want the culture of convenience, modernity and technology that Kanyon can offer.''
        Ms. Ashaboglu said she had rented more than 10 of the units to corporate clients who wanted lodging for their foreign employees.
        The apartments' earth-tone interiors have a modern feel, with wooden floors, floor-to-ceiling windows and wide balconies. The kitchens and bathrooms are fully furnished, unusual in Turkish apartments, with Siemens appliances in the designer kitchens and fixtures from Vitra, another Eczacibasi company, in the bathrooms.
        The units range from a studio of 80 square meters, or 860 square feet, that sold for $250,000 (the big-ticket real estate economy here is based on the American dollar) to a 380-square-meter, or 4,090-square-foot, penthouse for $2 million that has a private terrace and views that stretch from the Black Sea to the north to the Sea of Marmara to the south.
        All the apartments have been sold, Mr. Lehto said, adding that some are starting to come back on the market at much higher prices.
        In contrast to Kanyon's fresh face, the Rizzo and Kamondo buildings were in ruins, and at risk of being razed, when Beyoglu AS decided to renovate them.
        ''History should be preserved for obvious reasons,'' said Sarp Tiryakioglu, 35, a managing partner at Beyoglu AS, ''but at the same time, we also believe that there is going to be a value to the end user from a commercial point of view because these buildings are unique.''
        The Rizzo originally was owned by wealthy merchants who came to Istanbul from Italy in 1883; the Kamondo is named for a family of Sephardic Jews who emigrated from Spain and established a banking empire. Even today, the Beyoglu district draws a mix of Turks and foreigners to its European architecture, proximity to night life and mesmerizing views.
        The Turkish bureaucracy was the first difficulty that Beyoglu AS faced. ''It took about 10 months to get the permits in order for both buildings and another 10 months of construction at the Rizzo to create a Class A residential apartment building while preserving its historic identity,'' Mr. Tiryakioglu said.
        The Rizzo apartments vary from 130 to 500 square meters, or 1,400 to 5,380 square feet, and several have coveted views of the Bosporus. Only one unit is unsold: A garden apartment that is being rented by an architecture firm for $4,500 a month. It is listed for sale at $1 million, Mr. Tiryakioglu said.
        The building's common areas feature details like Art Nouveau accents in wrought iron, stone lion's heads flanking the front door, decorative tulip motifs reflecting the city's Ottoman history and a leaf motif winding up the interior balustrade.
        The original interior frescoes were lost, so Mr. Tiryakioglu hired Restorers Without Borders, a company led by Pavlos Konstantinos Politis, a former Greek monk, to come up with a design for the five-meter-high, or 16-foot-high, lobby and the grand marble staircase.
        The lobby ''had been painted over and over again and there wasn't anything original that we could protect,'' he said. ''But because the Rizzos were quite prosperous traders, we wanted to give the interior of the building a palace-like feeling.''
        Inspired by the entryway's original stone flooring, Mr. Politis's team created an elegant aviary design that includes a peacock fresco. ''Now there are these painted birds all over the place,'' Mr. Tiryakioglu said, ''and when you reach the top floor, they are flying toward a glass skylight, in the shape of a star, toward the sky.''
        In addition to a new decor, the building now has electrical wiring, natural gas heating, satellite television service and safety features like emergency lighting, security cameras and burglar alarms.
        At the Kamondo, Mr. Tiryakioglu's company rescued a structure that had been a ruin for 25 years, left to rot by its owners who hoped to get a demolition permit. ''But thankfully there were some initiatives locally to stop the process and we were able to buy the building in 2004,'' he said.
        When work is finished early next year, the Kamondo will have two ground-floor retail spaces and eight residences ranging from 120 and 350 square meters, or 1,290 and 3,766 square feet, some with views of the Bosporus, Topkapi Palace and the Hagia Sophia. Around the same time, a book chronicling the building's history is due to be published, written by a neighborhood architect.
        Mr. Tiryakioglu would not disclose the planned prices for the Kamondo residences, except to say that they will be more expensive than the Rizzo's and that all already are reserved.
        Both renovations are well worth premium prices, Mr. Tiryakioglu said. ''The people who move into these buildings will take over a heritage which has been there for more than 100 years,'' he added. ''You can buy a flat in Kanyon, and not even know that you are in Istanbul. You could be in any large metropolitan city.''
        ''But if you really want to know it's Istanbul, and if you want something unique, then that's the product that we can offer.''
        Already, Ms. Ashaboglu said, the Rizzo and Kanyon projects are having an effect on the market in general.
        ''These renovations have inspired Turkish property owners to improve their own buildings as a way to make the most of their investment and better cater to the new class of young executives looking to buy or rent in the area,'' she said. ''And of course, it does make the prices go up.''
      