
        The dangers of over-the-counter painkillers will be prominently highlighted on the labels of hundreds of common remedies under a proposal announced yesterday by the Food and Drug Administration.
        The proposed warnings -- about possible liver failure from acetaminophen and gastrointestinal bleeding from other medicines like aspirin, ibuprofen, naproxen and ketoprofen -- follow alarms about overusing such medications.
        "These drugs are used by tens of millions of people every week, and they are quite safe," Dr. Charles Ganley, director of the F.D.A. office of nonprescription drugs, said in a news conference.
        But Dr. Ganley said that when the drugs are used by so many people rare problems could add up.
        Doctors have raised concerns about overdoses from drugs containing acetaminophen, a leading cause of acute liver failure.
        More than 200 million Americans a year take products like Tylenol with acetaminophen, and overdoses cause up to 450 deaths a year from acute liver failure.
        Suicides account for most of the deaths, but up to 200 occur when patients unknowingly take too much or combine multiple medications that include the drug, according to statistics presented to the drug agency.
        ''People will take a medicine to go to sleep at night and they'll take a cold medicine and they'll take a medicine for their joint pains, and they won't realize that each of one of those products contains, say, acetaminophen,'' said Dr. Paul B. Watkins, a professor of medicine at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. ''They are unknowingly taking four times the maximum daily dose of acetaminophen.''
        The proposed rules would mean that any of the hundreds of over-the-counter products with acetaminophen would have to list it prominently on the principal display panel of the container and the outer carton.
        The containers would include a prominent warning that acetaminophen overdoses can cause liver failure and that the drug should not be used by people drinking three or more alcoholic drinks.
        Separately, products containing aspirin and other painkillers known as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories like ibuprofen, ketoprofen and naproxen will warn of gastrointestinal bleeding. One study found 15 deaths as a result of gastrointestinal bleeding for each 100,000 users of the medications, also known as Nsaids.
        Those dangers are particularly high in people older than 60, with ulcers or prior stomach bleeding, taking blood thinners or steroid medications, consuming more than three drinks a day or taking more than one product containing the drugs, the labels would say.
        Dr. Watkins was on an advisory panel that recommended some of the changes four years ago, but they were delayed by what Dr. Ganley termed an ''intolerably long'' regulatory process.
        He estimated that it could take a year for the rules to take effect after a comment period. A panel of the drug agency made recommendations for stronger acetaminophen warnings in 1977. After the recommendations in 2002, some companies voluntarily changed labels to emphasize the possibility of liver problems associated with acetaminophen.
        Linda A. Suydam, president of the Consumer Healthcare Products Association, said some of its members had already changed their labels.
        ''The reality is, however, that over-the-counter medicines are real medicines with real risks if misused,'' Ms. Suydam said.
        Dr. William M. Lee, a doctor who sounded an alarm on acetaminophen, said some voluntary label changes fell short.
        ''I think they still don't want to put big bold letters: 'This is a poison. You shouldn't take too much of it,' '' said Dr. Lee, a professor of internal medicine at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.
        In addition to deaths associated with liver failure, acetaminophen is the leading cause of calls to poison control centers and is responsible for an estimated 56,000 emergency room visits and 2,600 hospitalizations every year.
        A recent study of liver failure in which Dr. Lee participated found that the percentage of cases related to acetaminophen overdoses had grown. Many were caused when patients with chronic pain took prescription narcotics bundled with acetaminophen. The new proposal does not address that combination.
        ''The chronic pain people are scaling up the dose, often over several months, until they probably reach a threshold where they can no longer tolerate the increased dose of acetaminophen,'' Dr. Lee said.
        He said a new advisory panel meeting was needed to consider that.
      