
        TODD HANSHAW wanted a Big Mac, a large order of fries and a Diet Coke for lunch. That it added up to 1,130 calories, or a little more than half of what his trainer suggested he eat for the day, made no difference.
        ''You splurge and then you take it back later,'' said Mr. Hanshaw, a fashion director who was eating a quick lunch in Midtown Manhattan before getting on a plane to Los Angeles, where he lives.
        That's not quite the attitude the New York City Board of Health was hoping for when it passed a law last week that will force some restaurants to list calories on menus by this summer.
        The point of the measure, part of a food-regulation package that will also eliminate trans fats in restaurant kitchens, is to help prevent obesity and the diseases that go along with it. Health officials hope that once someone sees that a Starbucks mocha made with whole milk and whipped cream has 420 calories, the 160-calorie latte made with skim milk will seem the wiser choice.
        ''They may not have an idea of how many calories they need, but they know what's bigger and what's smaller,'' said Dr. Lynn Silver, an assistant commissioner with the city's department of health.
        But conversations with Mr. Hanshaw and other New York fast-food customers showed that the law could have a hard time reaching its goal.
        ''I don't think people who count calories eat at McDonald's,'' said Michelle Iadarola of Staten Island. Although she rarely eats at McDonald's, she was about to order a bacon, egg and cheese biscuit (440 calories) because she was in a hurry. The calorie count made no difference.
        The law is considered radical both by people who hold food companies partly responsible for the obesity crisis and by those who see the government's regulation of food deemed unhealthy as an affront to freedom of choice.
        ''The health department should be concentrating more on the inspection of things like E.-coli-ridden scallions than the calorie content of food items,'' said Mario Batali, the chef.
        Mr. Batali will not have to list calorie amounts on his menus at Babbo or Del Posto. Virtually every high-end restaurant in New York is exempt. The rule applies only to restaurants that have standardized recipes and that have made nutrition information publicly available on the Internet, printed brochures or other methods as of March 2007.
        That's about 10 percent of the restaurants in New York. It effectively exempts both restaurants like Per Se, where butter and foie gras drive calorie counts soaring, to the corner kabob shop, where price and convenience matter more than the nutritional content of a shawarma.
        Not all big chains will have to disclose calories, either. Outback Steakhouse, for example, is exempt because it doesn't publish the fact that items like its Bloomin' Onion appetizer has almost 1,800 calories, a figure obtained through a calorie analysis by the Center for Science in the Public Interest, which has long been pushing for restaurants to label the nutrition values of food.
        For companies that have voluntarily published nutrition information, the new law presents logistical challenges. Menu boards are already crowded with choices, and redesigning menus just for the New York market can be costly, people in the industry said.
        Executives at the Starbucks corporate headquarters in Seattle said they will comply with the new law at their 326 stores in New York, but they have no idea how. The company offers 87,000 drink combinations, depending on the kind of milk, amount of syrup and whether the drink has whipped cream, said Valerie O'Neil, a Starbucks spokeswoman.
        Companies that offer several variations on one item can list a calorie range, and that might help. Or the company might ask for permission from the health department to put the information near the cash register instead of on the menu board.
        ''We have not decided what's going to happen,'' Ms. O'Neil said, adding that the company maintains there are more effective ways to help consumers decide what to order.
        Some Starbucks customers aren't looking forward to the change, either. ''The menu is too confusing already,'' said Loretta Sayegh of Park Slope, Brooklyn, who was ordering a nonfat latte for herself (120 calories) and a hot chocolate with whipped cream (360 calories) for her daughter, Zoe.
        And there is no telling how accurate the counts will be. Even though most chains use standardized recipes, the hand of an over-eager cook might add more cheese or oil, throwing off the count.
        A few chain restaurant operators are already wondering if it would be easier to simply take down any publicly available nutrition information before the deadline, thus exempting themselves from the law.
        ''The problem is that more and more restaurants aren't going to want to provide this information,'' said Sue Hensley, a senior vice president with the National Restaurant Association. ''Why would they? It's a great idea to provide nutrition information. It's just that this is not an effective way to do it.''
        The biggest challenge might simply be that few diners actually know how many calories is too many, or even care.
        People who are watching what they eat often know how to modify an order and don't necessarily use calories as a guide. Only 7 percent of diners are counting calories as a way to manage weight, according to a recent study of 1,978 adults conducted by Mintel International, a market research firm in Chicago.
        ''Those 7 percent might be thrilled to know how many calories their food contains, but a whole bunch of the population isn't going to care,'' said Marcia Mogelonsky, a senior research analyst for Mintel.
        Diane Staye of East New York, Brooklyn, has been eating at Subway lately because her doctor told her she had to lose weight. She chose a whole wheat six-inch bun, had the worker pull out the inside, then added turkey, lettuce and tomato, and had it topped with vinegar and oil. Her total calorie count was 280.
        ''I guess that's good, right?'' she said.
        Health officials hope the law will at least make a dent in a nation full of calorie dunces. Most people have no idea how many calories they should eat every day or how many calories foods contain, especially in an era of oversize restaurant portions.
        ''I can't do it, and I figure if I can't do it no one can do it,'' said Marion Nestle, a professor in the Department of Nutrition, Food Studies and Public Health at New York University, and the author of the guide ''What to Eat'' (North Point Press, 2006).
        ''The idea of a calorie is a very abstract concept,'' she said. ''People have some vague idea that it involves energy and is somehow related to weight gain, but they have no idea what it means in relation to food. You can't tell how many calories you're eating by looking.''
        For the record, a calorie is the amount of energy needed to raise one liter of water by one degree Celsius. Applied to food, it means the unit of energy produced by food when it's used by the body.
        Government guides don't really help. Trying to find out how many calories one should eat at mypyramid.com, the government's latest effort to help the public interpret its Dietary Guidelines is an exercise in frustration. Plug the word ''calories'' into the search engine and 254 entries pop up. After clicking through a few dozen, it seems easier to just give up and go out for a doughnut (180 calories).
        Even people who are aware of how many calories they are eating throw their concerns out the window at a restaurant, said Brian Wansink, who directs the Cornell University Food and Brand Lab, and recently published ''Mindless Eating: Why We Eat More Than We Think'' (Bantam).
        Displaying calories will probably make a difference to only a small segment of people, he said, because eating at a restaurant is an excuse to splurge in the name of fun.
        ''Eating out is a holiday from a boring day,'' Mr. Wansink said. ''We find people are prone to underestimate how many calories are in something because they don't want to ruin their day.''
        Supporters of the law say that that is exactly why listing calories matters. If people knew what they were about to eat before they ordered, health officials reason, they'd make better choices.
        ''The experience with labeling on packaged goods is that most people do consult calorie counts,'' said Dr. Silver of the health department. ''You don't have to have a deep understanding of nutrition to look at a package or read a menu and know fewer calories is better.''
      