
        In an end to a two-year journey that was as much about politics as it was about science, legislators on Thursday approved New Jersey's most sweeping and financially ambitious effort to take a lead role in stem-cell research.
        By comfortable margins, the State Senate and the General Assembly authorized borrowing $270 million to build the state's first stem-cell research centers in New Brunswick, Newark and Camden. Gov. Jon S. Corzine said on Thursday that he would enthusiastically sign it.
        ''It's, I think, one of the great initiatives that this state has taken on," Mr. Corzine said. "I think it really does sustain our leadership as the recognized medicine chest of certainly the country, and probably the globe.''
        Approval of the stem-cell measures came on a madcap final session of the year in which the calendar was crammed with several pieces of major legislation.
        One minute, the Assembly was approving a measure establishing civil unions for same-sex couples and expanding campaign finance reform.
        The next, the Senate was leaving lobbyists, reporters and others clustered in the halls of the State House in a lurch by delaying the start of its session by three hours because of 11th-hour snags over bills intended to reduce property taxes. Amid the swirl there were news conferences, an ethics hearing in which a number of lawmakers were accused of conflicts of interest -- and at least two holiday parties held across the street from the State House by lobbying firms.
        ''It was very reminiscent of budget time,'' said Michael P. O'Connell, a lobbyist with the firm Pringle Quinn Anzano. ''A lot of people waiting for big answers, results. But it was different, because you could pose for pictures with Santa.''
        Ultimately, both the Senate and the Assembly decided to put off until next year any action on property taxes -- which for months had seemingly captured most of their attention -- including measures dealing with pension and health benefits for state employees, school financing and consolidating local governments.
        For their part, the Democrats insisted the delay was necessary to do a thorough job. ''We're closer and closer by the minute,'' said the Senate majority leader, Bernard F. Kenny Jr., of Hudson County.
        Not surprisingly, Republicans disagreed. ''Instead of property tax relief and reform, which is needed immediately in New Jersey, the people of this state have gotten coal in their Christmas stockings,'' said the Senate minority leader, Leonard Lance, of Hunterdon County.
        For all the turmoil in the chambers, behind closed doors and in the crowded hallways, the final votes on stem-cell research were uneventful events, a marked difference from the political machinations that have surrounded the issue since it emerged two years ago.
        In 2004, Gov. James E. McGreevey signed a bill to establish the country's first state-supported stem-cell research institute, despite the objections of Roman Catholic bishops and others, proclaiming that medical science should not be compromised by politics.
        New Jersey also earned the distinction of becoming the second state in the nation, after California, to approve a law specifically legalizing embryonic stem-cell research, much to the chagrin of anti-abortion advocates, because it requires the destruction of human embryos.
        But as politicians in New Jersey squabbled over the details of how to translate the idea of a research institute into a bricks-and-mortar reality, at least half a dozen states -- including Connecticut and Maryland -- created similar funds or research centers. In recent months, stem-cell advocates had become increasingly fretful that New Jersey was losing competitive ground.
        One of the sticking points, according to Assemblyman Neil M. Cohen, a Democrat from Union County who sponsored the bill, was that the Corzine administration initially insisted that all of the research be conducted at Rutgers University in New Brunswick.
        But under a compromise, the measure calls for $150 million to go toward a research center in New Brunswick, and $50 million apiece for facilities in Camden and Newark. The remaining $20 million is to be used at centers in Belleville and in Allendale.
        The projects are expected to be finished within a few years, and they are eventually expected to generate about a billion dollars in economic activity and create more than 10,000 jobs, according to a recent Rutgers study.
        Supporters hope the investment, paid for with the state's unused bonding capacity, will pay off with the recruitment of top researchers and the promise of federal funds should the Bush administration's ban on financing for embryonic stem-cell research be lifted.
        ''What edge California thought they had, they've lost it,'' Mr. Cohen said.
        But Marie Tasy, executive director of New Jersey Right to Life, criticized the vote as ''putting the cart before the horse, because they're funding buildings before voters have a chance to fund the research.''
        In the next couple of months, the Assembly is expected to consider a related measure that has already cleared the Senate: asking voters in November to approve $230 million in grants for stem-cell research.
        But on Thursday, at least, debate on the highly charged emotional issue lasted only a minute or two in each chamber.
        Some said that perhaps the legislators were trying to pace themselves during a day that was expected to be long but in the end was not. Or maybe it was the holiday spirit that had wafted across State Street from parties sponsored by the New Jersey Restaurant Association or the lobbying firm of Mulroy, LiCausi & Gibbs.
        Even Santa Claus was spotted going down the stairs of the State House. But when asked jokingly by a reporter, ''Is that you, Gov. Corzine?'' he turned and answered, ''I'm the Grinch.''
      