
        Ban Ki-moon of South Korea was sworn in Thursday as the next secretary general of the United Nations, and he pledged to rebuild faith in an organization that has been tarnished by scandal and riven by disputes between rich and poor nations.
        ''You could say that I am a man on a mission, and my mission could be dubbed 'Operation Restore Trust': trust in the organization, and trust between member states and the Secretariat,'' he said.
        He added, ''I hope this mission is not 'Mission: Impossible.' ''
        Mr. Ban, 62, takes office on Jan. 1, succeeding Kofi Annan, 68, who is at the end of his second five-year term.
        Addressing the packed General Assembly hall after taking the oath, Mr. Ban heaped praise on Mr. Annan, who received two standing ovations, as a man of ''high ideals, noble aspirations and bold initiatives.''
        But in a subsequent news conference, he distanced himself from Mr. Annan's plea Monday that the United States return to a more multilateral foreign policy grounded in respect for international law.
        ''That, I think, was his own personal assessment and insight, which he gained during his tenure,'' he said.
        Mr. Ban, who had strong United States backing, acknowledged that the relationship between the United Nations and the United States had become strained.
        ''But even in such a case,'' he said, ''it is very important to discuss, to resolve the difference of opinions, and I, as secretary general, will try to harmonize so that we can expect constructive contribution and participation of the United States.''
        Mr. Ban was emphatic in answering questions about the campaign in Iran to cast doubt on the Holocaust and about statements by Iran's president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, that Israel should be wiped off the map.
        He said denying the Holocaust was ''not acceptable,'' as was urging the elimination of a nation or people.
        He also pledged to become ''directly and personally engaged'' in trying to persuade Sudan to accept United Nations peacekeepers for Darfur.
        Calling the Middle East ''the most serious issue'' today, he urged Israeli and Palestinian leaders to deal directly with each other.
        He stumbled only once, appearing uncomprehending when a Canadian reporter asked a question in French. Traditionally, French speakers have held the job, and Mr. Ban had underscored the point by giving part of his address in French.
        ''I was not able to follow everything you said,'' he told the questioner, and asked for a translation.
        The question was, ''I would like to know why, in your view, it is important that French should remain the second official working language of the United Nations.''
      