
        With Judith Regan's authors still reeling from their publisher's abrupt dismissal, the sparring between the headline-making Ms. Regan and her former employer, the News Corporation, grew more intense, more personal and more specific on Monday over accusations that she had made anti-Semitic comments that prompted her firing.
        The News Corporation, controlled by Rupert Murdoch, released what it described as notes of a heated telephone conversation on Friday between Ms. Regan and Mark Jackson, a lawyer for HarperCollins, the corporation's publishing division that includes the ReganBooks imprint.
        According to the notes, Ms. Regan protested that the publishing house had not supported her during a firestorm last month over a confessional book by O. J. Simpson and a related television program, which the News Corporation canceled after public protests and growing unease among affiliate television stations.
        '''Of all people, the Jews should know about ganging up, finding common enemies and telling the big lie,''' Ms. Regan said, according to the notes Mr. Jackson made as the conversation unfolded; the notes were provided by Gary Ginsberg, an executive vice president of News Corporation.
        According to the notes, Ms. Regan then said that the literary agent Esther Newberg; HarperCollins' executive editor, David Hirshey; HarperCollins' president, Jane Friedman; and Mr. Jackson ''constitute a Jewish cabal against her.''
        A lawyer for Ms. Regan, Bert Fields, denied Monday that she had said there was a ''Jewish cabal against her,'' saying that she had used only the word ''cabal'' in the conversation, and that was done in response to Mr. Jackson's using the word in a question to her. But Mr. Fields acknowledged that during the heated conversation by phone last Friday, she had made some version of the first statement, drawing attention to the fact that her boss and others involved in the controversy over the aborted O. J. Simpson project were Jewish.
        He denied, though, that this reflected any anti-Semitism. ''There is nothing insulting to Jewish people in saying that Jews should particularly understand what it is to be victims of the big lie,'' Mr. Fields said. ''They were looking for an excuse to fire her, and they fired her, and called it anti-Semitic. It ain't anti-Semitic.''
        And, Mr. Fields said, even if she had said ''Jewish cabal,'' that would not have been anti-Semitic. ''I want to make it clear that had she said it, even that is not an anti-Semitic remark,'' he said. ''Had she said it, I wouldn't be offended, as a Jew.''
        Mr. Fields said he planned to file a lawsuit against HarperCollins for dismissing Ms. Regan in breach of her contract. HarperCollins declined to comment, as did Ms. Newberg.
        ReganBooks has scrambled in the days since the firing to reassure its authors that their books would move forward, despite Ms. Regan's abrupt replacement by Cal Morgan, and the escalating invective in the dispute.
        Pam Manela, who wrote ''A Man & His Meatballs'' with her husband, John LaFemina, said their editor, Cassie Jones, called on Saturday morning. ''They just said, 'We're sure you've heard the news, we just want to assure you that we're still committed to your project, and internally nothing has changed,''' Ms. Manela said, adding that she was ''shocked, to say the least'' about Ms. Regan's termination. ''They've assured us that nothing's going to fall through the cracks.''
        Gloria Allred, a high-profile lawyer and ReganBooks author, said she received an e-mail message on Saturday from Mr. Morgan, the new head of the imprint. Ms. Allred speculated that Ms. Regan's firing was a result of personality clashes. ''It's not been a well- kept secret that apparently there were tensions within the corporation,'' she said. ''Judith would give you the truth as she sees it. Maybe not always a truth that other people want to accept.''
        But Ms. Allred said she was saddened by the suggestion that Ms. Regan made anti-Semitic comments. ''I'm Jewish, and she's never made an anti-Semitic comment to me,'' she said.
        Other authors said they had been bruised in their relations with Ms. Regan, but had no experience of her making anti-Semitic remarks.
        Peter Lance, the author of ''Triple Cross,'' an investigative work about the F.B.I. and the terror network of Osama Bin Laden, said Ms. Regan abandoned his book, released in late November, when the media storm erupted over the O. J. Simpson project, even canceling a scheduled interview with him on her own radio program.
        ''Having said that, in the five years I've known her, I've never known Judith to utter an anti-Semitic remark,'' he said.
        Pat Montandon, a former San Francisco society columnist who was lampooned as a character in ''Tales of The City'' by Armistead Maupin, has written a memoir that ReganBooks is set to publish in April. When Ms. Regan announced plans to publish the Simpson book, Ms. Montandon said she nearly withdrew her book, ''Oh the Hell of It All,'' from the imprint.
        ''I called my son and said, 'I feel like having a press conference and saying I'm not going to have my book published,'' Ms. Montandon said. She reconsidered, and decided to stay on.
        The publishing world has been reeling from the abrupt dismissal last Friday of Ms. Regan, one of the most successful publishers in the business, whose penchant for sensational topics has served her well with books like ''How to Make Love Like a Porn Star,'' which had the film actress Jenna Jameson as a co-author, and ''The Gotti Diet: How I Took Control of My Body, Lost 80 Pounds, and Discovered How to Stay Fit Forever,'' by Frank Gotti Agnello.
        But Ms. Regan was known to have a strained relationship with Ms. Friedman, who found some of Ms. Regan's projects distasteful though lucrative, while the independent-minded Ms. Regan felt that her boss and others at the company were allied against her.
        Despite the success Ms. Regan brought Mr. Murdoch's publishing business since he established her imprint in 1994, their relationship had soured in recent weeks as she became involved in the controversy involving the Simpson book, ''If I Did It,'' and the companion television special she had championed.
        ''I don't think she treats people the right way, and it does catch up with you,'' said Kathryn M. Ireland, a British-born fabric designer who wrote a book for Ms. Regan that the publisher ultimately rejected. ''The chickens eventually come home to roost, and this is what's happened to her now. But I don't think it's the end of Judith by any means. She'll probably reappear as the head of a studio or something.''
        MEDIA
      