
        INTERNATIONAL A3-14
        Iraqis in Talks on Coalition To Break Cleric's Influence  Following discussions with the Bush administration, several of Iraq's major political parties are in talks to form a coalition whose aim is to break the powerful influence of the radical Shiite cleric Moktada al-Sadr within the government, senior Iraqi officials say.  A1
        Somalia Flood Cripples Nation  A deluge has arrived, plunging Somalia's breadbasket underwater, creating the conditions for an extended famine and taking the region's woes to a whole new level. Experts say this has been the worst flood season in East Africa in 50 years. A6
        3 Children of Fatah Aide Slain  Gunmen sprayed a car with bullets in Gaza City, killing three young brothers, ages 3 to 9, who were the sons of a senior Palestinian security officer for Fatah. A14
        4 More Connected to Poisoning  Four people in Germany who had contact with a business associate of a former Russian agent who died after ingesting polonium 210 were hospitalized, on suspicion they had been contaminated by the same radioactive substance.  A10
        Iran's 'Debate' on Holocaust  Iran held a gathering that included Holocaust deniers, discredited scholars and white supremacists from around the world under the guise of a conference to ''debate'' the Nazi slaughter of six million Jews.  A3
        Students disrupted a speech by President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran at a major university, setting fire to photographs and throwing firecrackers. It was the first major public protest against him since he took office. A3
        NATIONAL A16-29
        Gay and Seeking a Place Among Evangelicals  Gay evangelicals come from a tradition whose leaders have led the fight against acceptance of homosexuals. They seem to have few paths carved out for them: they can leave religion behind; they can turn to liberal congregations that often differ from the tradition they grew up in; or they can enter programs to try to change their behavior, even their sexual orientation.  A1
        Congress Decides on Medicare  Doctors had been fearing a pay cut under Medicare, but Congress has offered them a small bonus with big strings attached. To get the money, doctors will have to report how often they provide quality care, as defined by the government.
        A27
        Kucinich Joins '08 Hopefuls  During a chat in his office last week, Representative Dennis Kucinich, Democrat of Ohio, said he plans to run for president again in 2008.
        A22
        Muslim Charity Sues U.S.  In a new challenge to the United States government over its shuttering of several American Muslim charities it has accused of aiding terrorism, the largest such group filed a lawsuit seeking dismissal of many of the charges.
        A24
        EDUCATION
        Raising Tuition to Compete  As the race for rankings and choice students has shaped college pricing, colleges, including the University of Notre Dame and the University of Richmond, sharply bumped up tuition to match competitors. They also gave out more in financial assistance.
        A1
        NEW YORK/REGION B1-6
        City Fails to Collect Millions in Water Bills  New York City has failed to collect on millions of dollars in overdue water bills because its records are so riddled with factual errors and outdated information that pursuing deadbeats and delinquents has become virtually impossible. A1
        Big Protest in New Jersey  At least six New Jersey school districts closed for the day, and as many as 10,000 teachers and state employees gathered on the steps of the State House to protest an attempt to overhaul their pension plans.  B1
        Rap Lyrics as Confession  The police say that when they arrested Ronell Wilson in the murder of two undercover detectives on Staten Island, they found handwritten rap lyrics in his pocket bragging about a killing. Now, at Mr. Wilson's trial, prosecutors argue that the lyrics amount to a confession.  B1
        Neediest Cases
        B6
        BUSINESS DAY C1-14
        Profiting From Identity Theft  The fear of identity theft has given rise to a nearly billion-dollar business in credit-monitoring services, but their abilities are far more limited than what is commonly perceived.
        A1
        U.S. Rebukes China on Piracy  In a 100-page report to Congress, the Bush administration accused Chinese leaders of failing to meet commitments to open the nation's economy and crack down on piracy of goods.
        C1
        Business Digest C2
        OBITUARIES B7
        Mario Llerena  A Cuban intellectual who was an early representative of Fidel Castro in the United States, he was 93.  B7
        EDITORIAL A30-31
        Editorials: Reckless with food safety; consumption gap; royalty ripoff; fighting drug fakes.
        Columns: Thomas B. Edsall, Nicholas D. Kristof.
        Crossword E8  TV Listings E11  Weather D8
      