
        Oprah Winfrey and ABC on Friday announced plans to team up to create two new feel-good reality shows. The two series will mark Ms. Winfrey's first venture into regular prime-time programming and the initial effort from the new television unit of her company, Harpo Productions.
        Ms. Winfrey is scheduled to appear in at least one of the shows, according to executives at ABC and Harpo. In one, ''Oprah Winfrey's 'The Big Give,' '' participants will compete to come up with the most creative ways to take a given amount of money and other resources and multiply them before giving them away to help others.
        The series will feature 10 contestants over eight episodes, with one contestant being eliminated each week. The format echoes a recent installment of ''The Oprah Winfrey Show'' in which Ms. Winfrey gave audience members gift cards worth $1,000, which they then had to use for a charitable cause.
        The second reality series, tentatively titled ''Your Money or Your Life,'' will feature ''families facing a life crisis'' who will be offered help with financial and other decisions by ''an expert action team,'' according to a description of the show released Friday.
        While the two series have not yet been scheduled, summer is the typical tryout time for new reality shows. The agreement with ABC was first reported Friday by Variety, the entertainment trade publication.
        ''Having her involved in prime-time television is a huge thing,'' Stephen McPherson, the president of ABC Entertainment, said in an interview. He declined to predict whether the two new series would prove as popular as many of Ms. Winfrey's other television ventures, but he acknowledged that hopes were high.
        ''We've had great success together with movies and other specials,'' Mr. McPherson said, adding that ABC was producing at least two specials with Ms. Winfrey by ABC for next year.
        Ms. Winfrey's syndicated daytime talk show regularly draws more than eight million viewers, a bigger audience than that drawn by roughly two-thirds of the shows broadcast in prime time on the four major networks.
        Ellen Rakieten, executive vice president for creative development at Harpo Productions and one of the executives who is overseeing the new reality shows, said the purpose of both series was ''to inspire people.''
        ''They are an amalgamation of a thousand different 'Oprah' shows we've done,'' Ms. Rakieten said. ''The best feeling you can have is to give to other people. That is a general mission that we have had all along.''
        That type of reality show would fit in well with ABC's other nonscripted programming, which tilts heavily toward feel-good shows like ''Extreme Makeover: Home Edition,'' ''Wife Swap'' and ''Supernanny.'' Those series primarily involve families trying to cope with or improve their circumstances, rather than the cutthroat, gross-out competitions favored by some reality producers.
        ''There will be no planned bug eating,'' Ms. Rakieten said.
        In September Harpo Productions announced the formation of a new television development group to create programming for syndication, broadcast networks, cable channels and digital media.
        In addition to Ms. Rakieten, who has worked on ''The Oprah Winfrey Show'' since its inception 20 years ago, the group is overseen by Harriet Seitler, executive vice president of marketing and development, who joined Harpo in 1995.
        Both executives and the television division are based in Chicago, but they said it was not yet clear whether the reality series would be produced there, in Los Angeles or elsewhere.
        The extent of Ms. Winfrey's on-camera involvement is also still being discussed, the executives said.
        ''She will appear in a show in places where it makes sense,'' Ms. Seitler said. ''We've learned that this is an incredibly fast-paced business, so we're moving to make those decisions as quickly as we can.''
        Other than appearing in prime time, the new shows are not much different than what goes on at Harpo Productions each day, Ms. Seitler said. ''We do reality programming every day on 'The Oprah Winfrey Show.' ''
      