
        Nigeria's governing party on Sunday morning selected a reclusive northern governor from a prominent political family to be its candidate in next year's presidential election.
        The selection by the People's Democratic Party of the governor, Umaru Yar'Adua, a 55-year-old former chemistry teacher, makes him the front-runner in the race to succeed Olusegun Obasanjo, who is barred by the Constitution from seeking a third term.
        The selection of Mr. Yar'Adua in a marathon voting session at the party's convention in Nigeria's capital, Abuja, caps a long tussle over who would secure the party's mantle for the 2007 presidential election, in April. It is expected to be the country's first time in the half century of the postcolonial era that one elected government will hand over power to another.
        Nigeria has see-sawed between military and civilian rule for much of that time, with multiple coups and military dictatorships. In 1999 Mr. Obasanjo, himself a former general who was the military ruler in the 1970s, was elected president, starting its longest uninterrupted period of elected government in this era. Next year's election, if successful, would solidify Nigeria's transition to democracy, making the country a bulwark of stability in a troubled region. The nation is Africa's most populous, with 130 million residents, and is the continent's leading oil exporter.
        Supporters of Mr. Obasanjo tried to alter the Constitution to allow him to run for a third term, but were defeated by overwhelming opposition, even within the president's own party. Mr. Obasanjo's vice president, Atiku Abubakar, had hoped to win the nomination to succeed his boss, but the two men had a falling out that resulted in Mr. Abubakar being denied the right to seek the nomination.
        The country has more than 200 ethnic groups spread across 36 states, with the population about evenly divided between Christians and Muslims. Each major ethnic group claims it has the right to control the presidency, and because Mr. Obasanjo is a Christian Yoruba from the southwest, northern Muslims say it is their turn to control the presidency. Members of other ethnic groups, particularly those in the oil-rich but impoverished Niger Delta, say their needs have been ignored and they deserve a chance at the helm.
        In a speech broadcast on Nigerian state television on Sunday, Mr. Yar'Adua said he had chosen a running mate from the Niger Delta, Goodluck Jonathan, the governor of the state of Bayelsa and a member of the Ijaw ethnic group. The choice appeared to be in part aimed at cooling the insurgency in the oil-producing region led by Ijaws that has reduced oil production by 25 percent.
        Mr. Yar'Adua is a northerner and a Muslim, but he is little known and is not a member of the military elite that has ruled Nigeria for much of its history. He has a reputation for cracking down on corruption, an important quality in a country struggling to overcome kleptocratic rule. But his main qualification appears to be his closeness to Mr. Obasanjo.
        Mr. Yar'Adua's older brother, Shehu, was Mr. Obasanjo's deputy when he was the country's military ruler. Mr. Obasanjo was the first military ruler to hand over power voluntarily to civilians, a fact that endeared him and the elder Mr. Yar'Adua to the Nigerian public.
        But he seldom travels outside Katsina, the northern state where he has served as governor for the last seven years. In convention hall, his election was greeted with little enthusiasm, Reuters reported, and most delegates left the hall before he gave his acceptance speech.
        Next year's election will be a daunting political and logistical challenge. Voter registration has been snarled by technical problems, and widespread violence, like the outbreaks that marred the last two elections, in 1999 and 2003, is expected.
      