
        AFTER 10 seasons as Monica Geller, the nerdy neatnik on the hit series ''Friends,'' Courteney Cox could have walked into the offices of any television network in Hollywood and had executives open their wallets for the right to feature her in a new series.
        So why, for ''Dirt,'' her first television project in nearly three years, did Ms. Cox choose the FX cable channel? It attracts fewer than one million households in prime time each night, according to Nielsen Media Research, one-quarter the number who still tune in to nightly reruns of ''Friends.''
        The answer says a lot about how television shows are made today, about how networks depend on stars to sell a show and about how even those actors who need never work again -- Ms. Cox and her peers on ''Friends'' earned $40 million each in the show's last two seasons alone -- sometimes cannot avoid being drawn back into the spotlight.
        ''I had no intention to go back to television, especially to an hourlong drama,'' Ms. Cox said during an interview here on the set of ''Dirt.'' The series, which has its premiere on Jan. 2, tells the story of a powerful tabloid editor who, in her pursuit of scoops about the lives and betrayals of the Hollywood elite, learns that the truth does not always set you free.
        Ms. Cox had not abandoned television entirely, but after ''Friends'' she set off on a career as a producer rather than seeking more work as an actor. ''Dirt'' was one of the first projects conceived by Coquette Productions, the company owned by Ms. Cox and her husband, David Arquette, who are co-executive producers of the show.
        But it is no coincidence that the new show centers on the deception and misery that underlie the world of tabloid journalism. The idea came from Ms. Cox's own experience with the paparazzi when she was pregnant with her first child, Coco, now 2 1/2. In their pursuit of photographs documenting her pregnancy, Ms. Cox said, ''The paparazzi were incredibly annoying.''
        After one particularly unpleasant encounter with a photographer in which, Ms. Cox said, ''I just lost it,'' Thea Mann, an executive at Coquette, suggested creating a show about tabloid photographers. ''The idea was to do a show about a guy who would be willing to do anything,'' Ms. Cox said, ''the lowest of the low of paparazzo, the one that is in your garbage and just would do anything for the shot.''
        Searching for a writer to turn the idea into a series, she found a kindred spirit in Matthew Carnahan, a television writer and novelist who is the romantic partner of the actress Helen Hunt.
        ''Yeah, we've had horrible experiences,'' Mr. Carnahan said of his and Ms. Hunt's encounters with photographers. ''We've had people breaking into our property just to get pictures of our house. It's a scary, creepy feeling of genuine violation.''
        When approached by Ms. Cox, Mr. Carnahan was working on an idea about a schizophrenic character, based on a report he had heard on public radio about virtual-reality software that allowed users to experience some of the effects of schizophrenia.
        In discussions with Ms. Cox and her team at Coquette, ''the two things coalesced,'' Mr. Carnahan said. ''I thought if I can do a show about the cultural apocalypse told through the eyes of someone who's hallucinating as well as the perspective of someone who's deep inside the tabloid world, it could be really interesting. So I started constructing a sort of Faustian story about an actor and this paparazzo.''
        At first, Lucy Spiller, the tabloid editor played by Ms. Cox, was not intended to be at the center of the series. Instead, the focus was on a schizophrenic photographer, Don Konkey, played by Ian Hart, and an actor, played by Josh Stewart, who sells out his celebrity friends to further his own career.
        At the time the idea was born, Coquette had a contract with Warner Brothers Television to come up with ideas for new shows. Because the new series was conceived as a no-holds-barred look at a world filled with sex, drugs and, if not actual murder, plenty of backstabbing, Warner Brothers suggested taking the new series to FX, which is part of Rupert Murdoch's Fox entertainment empire and a specialist in racy, offbeat fare like ''Nip/Tuck,'' ''The Shield'' and ''Rescue Me.''
        But before the deal was completed, Coquette moved to Touchstone Television, which is part of the Walt Disney Company, the owner of the ABC network. Touchstone executives realized the series was far from the usual Disney fare (in the first episode, a womanizing professional basketball star appears in a kinky sex scene with a stripper), but its executives thought the show held promise and, despite never having produced a show for FX, agreed to pursue it.
        FX, however, wanted changes. The network did not want a show about the price of fame to center on a fictional celebrity, because it would be too easy for the audience to dismiss the action as made up. Similarly, the executives felt the questions faced by a tabloid photographer were not morally complicated enough to drive the series. And, not least, FX already had three successful shows centered on 40-something white male antiheroes.
        ''We wanted to explicitly start developing these female antiheroes,'' said John Landgraf, the president of FX. ''It just seemed like an editor was a much larger center of power and a place from where you could generate many more stories. And the tabloid world is really a place that's dominated by powerful female editors.''
        All three principals -- Mr. Landgraf, Mr. Carnahan and Ms. Cox -- said Ms. Cox expressed interest in playing the part herself only after seeing the revamped scripts centering on a dynamic female lead.
        ''She said, 'I'm not going to give this part to anyone else; I can't imagine anyone else playing it but me,' '' Mr. Landgraf said.
        Had she started out intending to star in a new show, Ms. Cox said, ''it probably would have been easier for me to get a show made on network TV, and I would have made more money.'' But, she said, ''The reason I wanted to do this on FX was because of the freedom it allows.'' And as an exercise in acting, she added, ''this is much more of a challenge.''
        Lucy Spiller is certainly more complex than Monica Geller. Though there is no denying that Monica could keep herself at an icy distance and there is no hiding Ms. Cox's bright cheekbones, she plays Lucy as dark and distant as Pluto.
        Ms. Cox describes Lucy as ''someone who you felt for but also who you loved to hate.'' Her overriding characteristic, she added, ''is that she always tells the truth, no matter what. What she might do to get the truth may not be great in a lot of people's eyes, but she won't print it unless it's the truth.''
        Which, as Mr. Landgraf explains, causes Lucy Spiller ''to leave this massive trail of destruction in her wake, because she has no nuanced sense of the truth as being anything other than absolute good.''
        ''Maybe someone has a right to privacy,'' he continued. ''Maybe there are certain truths that, while they benefit her and her magazine, are so massively destructive to the people around them that there might be an ethical or moral value in not publishing them. So she's an antihero.''
        Even so, Ms. Cox said the show was not intended as a kind of retribution aimed at celebrity photographers and magazines. ''I'm not trying to get back at anybody,'' she said. ''This is a television drama; we are here to entertain. And in fact, the paparazzo that we have on the show, Don Konkey, you have a real sympathy for him.''
        Of course, the question then becomes, does the series acknowledge the complicit relationship between celebrities and the tabloids -- at least nodding to the fact that to many celebrities, the biggest damage is not from appearing in the tabloids but from being absent?
        ''We're all complicit,'' Mr. Carnahan said. ''I'm sure we all in some way court attention from that part of the media. When these magazines are on our table in the writers' room, we read them. We call it research, but we read them.''
        TELEVISION
      