
        Scruffy but resilient, Coney Island has been a haven for people like Vincent Garcia.
        For nearly two decades, Mr. Garcia, a stocky, tattooed ex-convict known as Cuba, has lived in a tattered tan trailer in a parking lot on Stillwell Avenue near the Boardwalk.
        He began staying there while working as a security guard at the lot, he says, after losing his apartment nearby to higher rent.
        Today, the graying Mr. Garcia, his pit bull, Crazy, and his trailer blend into the landscape of tired rides, greasy fast food joints and vagrant Boardwalk regulars.
        But a snazzy reincarnation is planned for the crumbling seaside neighborhood, and the parking lot Mr. Garcia, 44, calls home is not part of that future.
        ''I spend half my life in here,'' he said. ''I don't want to leave.''
        The parking lot was bought this year by Thor Equities as part of a 10-acre parcel on which it plans to break ground for a colossal amusement, retail and hotel complex. The purchase placed Mr. Garcia's trailer in what a Thor spokesman, Lee Silberstein, called ''the heart of the redevelopment zone.''
        A letter hand-delivered to Mr. Garcia last week told him that he must vacate by Dec. 28. But Mr. Garcia said he did not plan to leave and was hoping to ''fight legally,'' though he cannot afford a lawyer. ''This piece of land is mine,'' he said. ''I'm not giving it up.''
        At the very least, he said, he hopes to convince Thor Equities to let him stay into the new year.
        Mr. Silberstein declined to comment about Mr. Garcia.
        Mr. Garcia's dilemma elicited pity from some, while others say Coney Island, which is littered with parcels of vacant land, badly needs new development.
        ''All those old rides should've been gutted years ago,'' Gary Haneline, 50, a Chelsea resident who has been visiting the Boardwalk for 20 years, said Saturday as he and two friends sat on plastic crates drinking tall cans of Coors Light.
        ''Look at those burned-out buses -- who's going to miss this stuff?'' Mr. Haneline said, pointing to a row of yellow school buses parked near the Boardwalk. More school buses are parked in the trash-covered lot behind Mr. Garcia's trailer, which he says he bought for $500. The man listed as the lot's previous owner could not be reached by telephone.
        Mr. Garcia, who says he is a former member of a street gang called Crazy Homicides, roars around the neighborhood on his Harley, no matter the weather.
        He speaks with a lisp because he lost his front teeth in a motorcycle accident last year.
        He has spent a total of six years in prison -- three years in the 1980s for possession of a weapon and stolen property and three years in the 1990s for burglary, according to the New York State Department of Correctional Services.
        ''I'm a different man now,'' he said. ''That's not the life for me.''
        His nickname is Cuba because that is where he came from in 1970, floating for five days, he says, to reach Miami on a plywood boat. He has a beer belly, a thick accent and a bitter hatred of Fidel Castro, who he says victimized his family by seizing their businesses.
        Now, he says, he is again at the mercy of a great power. This time, it is New York's real estate machine.
        Over the weekend, friends from his Brooklyn motorcycle club, Legion of Doom, took belongings from Mr. Garcia's 20-foot trailer and the meat locker he reassembled alongside it two years ago to their homes. Mr. Garcia has no idea where he will move next.
        He says that back in Miami, he exercised horses at a racetrack for $700 a day. He came to New York in the early 1980s, and today he fixes cars, does other odd jobs and collects scrap metal and cans.
        Mr. Garcia's view was of the International Speedway go-cart track across the street until last week when work crews began tearing apart the track. Construction noise, sounds of seagulls overhead and the rumble of elevated trains are shut out inside Mr. Garcia's tidy trailer, kept warm by a humming electrical heater.
        He fashioned a wall around the trailer with pieces of scrap wood and fencing and hunkers down there even in single-digit temperatures, getting his water from an underground hose running from a friend's Boardwalk restaurant, he says. Plastic tubing from the toilet runs into the lot's sewerage line. His washing machine sits outside the trailer, and he hangs his clothes on a line to dry.
        Inside, the trailer's wood panel walls are almost bare, except for a few hologram pictures of the Virgin Mary and an Army calendar with days circled or x-ed out. A ceramic angel sits by a broken sink. Mr. Garcia is praying for a miracle, but he has no illusions. He knows there is not much sympathy for someone like him, a part of Coney Island's soon-to-be past.
        ''I feel bad for him,'' said a man who has a Boardwalk restaurant who did not want to be identified because he is discussing the future of his business with Thor Equities. ''But then again, we're all in trouble.''
        CONEY ISLAND JOURNAL
      