
        Every day for two years, Ted Nolan awoke craving another head-coaching job in the N.H.L. Then one day he went to the movies, and what he saw helped him deal with the fact that he might not coach again.
        Nolan saw ''Ali,'' which starred Will Smith, and was impressed by how Muhammad Ali clung to his identity despite setbacks.
        Nolan, who grew up on an Ojibwa First Nation reserve in Ontario, had already been forging an identity apart from coaching.
        Not long after he was fired as the Buffalo Sabres' coach in 1997, Nolan formed a foundation that he believed would help promote healthy lifestyle choices for First Nation youths. The tribal work was fulfilling and rewarding.
        ''One day, one of my sons came up to me and said, 'Isn't it good you're not coaching? You wouldn't have been able to do what you did today,' '' Nolan said.
        Two years stretched into eight.
        Nolan said he remembered saying to his wife, Sandra, that perhaps he should let people know he was retired from coaching. Even when the Moncton Wildcats of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League asked him last year to become their coach, he balked at first.
        But then Nolan took the job, coaching the Wildcats to the league championship. After turning down an offer from the Islanders' owner, Charles Wang, to coach the team last December, he accepted the job in June.
        One-third of the way through his first N.H.L. season in nine years, Nolan has the Islanders playing better than expected. Although they were forecast by many to have a losing record, the gritty Islanders are 15-11-3.
        ''We have to work together,'' Nolan said in a recent interview at his barren office inside Nassau Coliseum. ''We don't have the type of team that can take the puck, like a Sidney Crosby, and go coast to coast. We have to rely on each other.''
        Nolan, 48, said it was a hard attitude to instill in any team. Every player wants to feel worthy. What Nolan has done is get each Islander to accept his role.
        ''Coming from the background I do, that's the only way I know how to do it,'' he said. ''Everyone's important.''
        Nolan's father, Stan, died when Nolan was 14. His mother, Rose, was killed in 1981 by a drunken driver. His older brother, Rod, died of a heart attack. His sister, Katie, died of cirrhosis of the liver.
        ''A lot of times, we didn't have much food to eat, and it was pretty cold, and there were alcohol problems,'' Nolan said of his hardscrabble childhood. ''Even through all of that, I was thankful for the people I had.''
        He played 78 games over three seasons in the N.H.L., then became a coach, first with Sault Ste. Marie of the Ontario Hockey League. Nolan was an assistant for a year in Hartford, then was hired by the Sabres in 1995.
        In his second season, Nolan was awarded the Adams Trophy as the N.H.L.'s top coach. But he abruptly lost his job, reportedly over a series of personality clashes with Sabres goaltender Dominik Hasek and General Manager John Muckler, who was also fired.
        ''I believe I was at the bad end of a lot of -- I don't know how to say it -- unjust rumors,'' Nolan said. ''People who didn't know me assumed I did something terrifically wrong not to get another job.''
        For example, Nolan said, it was reported that he had shown up drunk for a practice -- ''just idiotic things.'' He could not get another job that felt right; he turned down the Tampa Bay Lightning in 1997.
        ''Blackball sounds like the word hate,'' Nolan said. ''All I know now is that the situation that happened in Buffalo was probably the best thing to happen to me, because it really taught me that you can't control things other than your own life.''
        Nolan was introduced as the Islanders' coach on June 8, the same day Neil Smith was introduced as the Islanders' general manager. The Islanders' eighth coaching change in eight years was unusual because general managers typically hire coaches.
        Wang fired Smith 40 days later and replaced him with Garth Snow, who was the Islanders' backup goaltender. On Sept. 12, the Islanders announced they had signed their 25-year-old goalie, Rick DiPietro, to a 15-year contract, the longest in N.H.L. history.
        Asked if what happened during the off-season changed the way he coached the team, Nolan said: ''I don't hire and I don't fire. Charles offered me the job of coaching this team, and for at least the next three years, that's what I'm planning to do.''
        He considers himself blessed to have another chance. That Nolan has led the Islanders to a winning record seems, for now, to be a bonus. He said he had matured in the past nine years.
        ''I'm not trying to prove anybody wrong, to prove I can coach,'' he said. ''My life, at times, was spent trying to prove to people I can play, to prove I can coach. Now it's not so much proving to other people that we can compete.''
        HOCKEY
      