
        The United States and North Korea staked out tough positions as six-nation disarmament negotiations began here on Monday, two months after North Korea tested an atomic weapon.
        The senior United States negotiator, Assistant Secretary of State Christopher R. Hill, warned North Korea that it faced an extended period of sanctions if it refused to abandon its nuclear-weapons program.
        ''I think we are at a fork in the road, because frankly I can't tell at this point which road the D.P.R.K. is choosing,'' Mr. Hill said of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea after the opening session of the talks, the first in 13 months.
        ''We can go either road,'' he said. ''We would like to denuclearize by diplomatic negotiation, but if they don't want that we are quite prepared to go the other road.''
        In its opening statement at the negotiations -- which also involve China, South Korea, Russia and Japan -- North Korea demanded that all sanctions already in place against it be lifted before it talks about scrapping its nuclear program, The Associated Press reported, quoting a summary of the opening speech by the North Korean envoy.
        North Korea also demanded that it be given a nuclear reactor to generate power and assistance in meeting its energy needs until that reactor was operational, The AP reported.
        Diplomats and analysts monitoring the talks said they expected all sides to adopt a more flexible stance as the negotiations progressed this week at a state guest house in the Chinese capital. There is no deadline for a conclusion to the talks.
        North Korea's decision to resume negotiations so soon after the Oct. 9 test could help defuse fears that Asia is on the brink of an arms race. But most analysts agreed that it will be difficult for the international community to persuade the country to end its nuclear weapons program. Some of the participants at the session Monday were frustrated with the North's tactics.
        Several experts said the talks would be fruitless unless the United States relaxed economic and financial sanctions on the North. ''If the U.S. does lift some sanctions, I think North Korea will make some concessions,'' said Yan Xuetong, an expert in international relations at Tsinghua University in Beijing.
        Mr. Hill said a key objective for the talks was to revive an agreement reached by the six nations in September 2005 on ridding the Korean Peninsula of nuclear weapons. He said that China had been working on a plan to implement the agreement and that it would be discussed as the meeting continued over the rest of the week.
        Soon after the last six-nation talks, in November 2005, North Korea boycotted further negotiations when the United States imposed penalties on a bank in Macao that Washington asserted was helping to conceal transactions for North Korean companies.
        Mr. Hill said Washington was ready to discuss the financial restrictions in separate negotiations that are expected to begin in Beijing on Tuesday.
      