
        IF Martha Stewart can't keep down construction costs, is there any hope for the rest of us?
        Paying $700,000 for a fixer-upper in Norwalk last year after her release from federal prison, Ms. Stewart's company announced plans to train six needy women in how to rehabilitate the house and have them star in a reality-based TV series about the project.
        Instead, citing unexpectedly high costs, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia scrapped the idea and hired a New York contractor to renovate the antique colonial at 384 Flax Hill Road, then put it up for sale. Newly spiffed up, it was listed last month for $849,000 and, thanks to the Martha buzz, it found a buyer within 24 hours.
        ''It wasn't seen as a viable project because of the costs and the lack of revenue'' the series would produce, said Diana Pearson, a spokeswoman for Ms. Stewart's company. So the company decided to make the house salable, she said. The renovations totaled $300,000, and ''we are taking a loss,'' she said.
        Women who have fallen on hard times will still benefit from Ms. Stewart's largesse, Ms. Pearson said. The Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia Foundation, she said, has given $25,000 grants this year to three women's organizations -- Bottomless Closet, Incarcerated Mothers Law Project of Volunteers of Legal Service, and Women in Need.
        The Martha pedigree prompted a lot of early interest in the newly renovated house, said Susan Warburg of William Raveis Real Estate Services in Westport, the listing agent.
        Today, homes in that area and price range typically take five to six months to sell, she said. She would not confirm whether the buyers, who live nearby, offered the asking price. That information is not made public until after the closing.
        ''The house had good bones,'' said Ms. Warburg, mentioning the center hall colonial's nine-foot-high ceilings and floor plan with ''good flow.'' The restoration retained the elegance and architecture of the 1880s, she said, while providing desirable modern amenities, like an updated kitchen and bathrooms and air-conditioning.
        The contractor, Robert Smith, who owns PRB Design Group in New York, said he had been given free rein but had striven for historical accuracy. ''I was inspired by Martha's style and colors,'' he said. Neutrals predominate indoors and out; for the vinyl siding, he settled on taupe with white trim.
        Mr. Smith said Ms. Stewart's company never discussed the women's project with him, and he said he could not comment on the renovation's cost because he was bound by a confidentiality agreement.
        NOTICED
      