
        Theodore Roosevelt once broke in, smashing a window when he returned to find the house locked and the help asleep. Alfred E. Smith kept a menagerie in the backyard, including a 350-pound black bear, which wandered off and made itself at home next door, to the delight of the orphans who lived there. Four monkeys also once bolted, only to return on their own the next morning after what must have been a disappointing night on the town in Albany.
        Mario M. Cuomo lived there full time and almost never left. George E. Pataki hardly ever stayed -- evidence, to his critics, that he had distanced himself from the day-to-day affairs of Albany, often commuting between Manhattan and his home in Garrison, in the Hudson Valley.
        Now Albany is anticipating Eliot Spitzer's arrival at the governor's mansion. As attorney general, he stayed about two nights a week at an Albany hotel during legislative sessions. He just bought a house in nearby Columbia County, and two of his teenage daughters will finish high school in New York City and live with their mother in the Spitzers' Manhattan apartment, which will remain Mr. Spitzer's primary residence.
        Nevertheless, pledging to be a hands-on governor after being sworn in Dec. 31, Mr. Spitzer says he will spend as much time in Albany ''as necessary to do the job'' and will live in the gloomy-looking 40-odd-room Charles Addams-esque mansion. A patchwork of Victorian turrets, cupolas, bays and gingerbread, it will celebrate its 150th birthday next year.
        Things could be worse. It could be called Drumthwacket, Scottish and Gaelic for ''wooded hill,'' the name for the official refuge of the governor of New Jersey in Princeton, about 15 miles from the capital, Trenton.
        The Albany version, which goes by a more prosaic name -- the Executive Mansion -- is on Eagle Street, a convenient stone's throw from the Capitol (a Bible was hurled onto the grounds while Mr. Cuomo was governor).
        The governor-elect's wife, Silda Wall Spitzer, toured the mansion with Libby Pataki, the governor's wife, for several hours last month. (Last Friday, a radiator leak from the second floor flooded a downstairs parlor, but officials said the damage had been repaired.)
        ''There's obviously some great history there, and she hopes that more New Yorkers will get a chance to know it's their home, too,'' Christine Anderson, Mr. Spitzer's spokeswoman, said of the state's future first lady.
        Beginning in 1837, state officials made several ill-fated attempts to find a suitable residence for New York's chief executive. Typically, they rented quarters. The first governor to live at the mansion at 138 Eagle was Samuel J. Tilden, who rented it in 1875. It was built by Thomas Olcott, an Albany banker, who moved there in 1857.
        Shortly after moving in, Tilden honored the poet William Cullen Bryant at a reception attended by 2,000 people, which William Kennedy, the chronicler of Albany, called ''the greatest literary event in the city's history.''
        Mr. Spitzer may draw a similar-size crowd on New Year's Day. After holding the inaugural outdoors he plans to greet the public inside the mansion, reviving an Albany tradition.
        The Executive Mansion, which was bought by the state in 1877, has three full floors, but many more stories. One guidebook claims it has housed more presidents of the United States (Cleveland, both Roosevelts) than any other American residence except the White House.
        The mansion was periodically remodeled to meet the needs of its inhabitants, who until the mid-20th century rarely stayed more than two or three years. In the 19th century, Gov. Alonzo B. Cornell blamed the plumbing for an outbreak of malaria.
        Gov. Roswell P. Flower limited his workday to five hours, including lunch at the mansion. (He presciently transferred the gallery of governors' portraits to the Capitol from the mansion, which was not fireproof.) Gov. Frank S. Black and his family lived there only during the legislative session, returning to Troy the rest of the year because he could not afford to keep his whole family at the Albany house.
        Gov. David B. Hill, a bachelor, complained that the place was too cramped, and nearly doubled its size, but a successor, Levi P. Morton, arriving with 10 servants, found it too small still.
        Franklin D. Roosevelt, suffering from polio, installed an elevator and a swimming pool. During the Depression, Herbert H. Lehman, whose boxer puppies, Surplus and Deficit (Governor Hill had a cat named Veto), were born there, skimped on maintenance until part of the ceiling collapsed during the governor's annual dinner for the Court of Appeals (his brother was the chief judge).
        Nelson A. Rockefeller rarely lived at the mansion, but spent about $500,000 of his own fortune to redecorate it. He also installed a tennis court, a fallout shelter and a tapestry of Picasso's ''Guernica.''
        During the Rockefeller years, his lieutenant (and governor-in-waiting for about 15 years), Malcolm Wilson, was a regular lodger. So was one of Mr. Spitzer's predecessors as attorney general, Louis J. Lefkowitz. (''Louie's room'' was where President William McKinley slept the night before he was assassinated, catapulting Vice President Theodore Roosevelt into the White House.)
        Rockefeller himself usually flew off to his Manhattan apartment or his retreat in Maine or his estate in Westchester County or to some other undisclosed location.
        After a fire devastated the first floor of the Executive Mansion in 1961, there were calls to gut it or build or buy one elsewhere, but Rockefeller argued that it was cheaper to restore the century-old house and retain its sentimental value.
        While the house has views of the Hudson and the Catskills, there was reason to overlook the immediate surroundings. Even in the 1880s, the neighborhood was considered squalid, a characterization that was largely undiminished after Rockefeller's mammoth urban renewal of the state Capitol complex. (It is still far from perfect.)
        A sneak thief once filched Al Smith's overcoat, and when the Cuomos lived there a disgruntled former state janitor burglarized the place, stealing several silver vases and a videocassette recorder.
        That was just the element an Albany priest might have had in mind in 1939 when he testified against the granting of a license for a tavern virtually next door to the mansion in Albany's seedy South End.
        His logic seemed incontrovertible. ''A place of that kind,'' he said, ''would furnish a spot for malcontents to gather.'' He was referring, of course, to the tavern.
      