
        Hypothetical excerpts from the transcript of the Manning brothers' weekly quarterback telephone connection:
        ''Hang in there, bro, the family still loves you.''
        ''Stay calm in the face of adversity, and remember: 'D-caff'  'D-caff!' ''
        ''Rocket arm, still the best in the neighborhood.''
        Eli confirmed yesterday that he got through this week to Peyton after the Colts shattered like a thin pane of glass last Sunday in Jacksonville.
        ''We talk every week,'' Eli said on his day to share with the news media in the Giants' locker room, in advance of Sunday's divisional holy war against the Eagles. ''We talk just like brothers. It's kind of having someone to be able to get something off your chest. It's not advice, it's not something I have to tell him he doesn't know.''
        But don't we typically make it our personal business to articulate the obvious when we believe that our loved ones are hurting? After a month of misery in the Meadowlands, wasn't it Eli's turn this week to remind big brother Peyton to stay off the roof of the RCA Dome in Indianapolis and away from sharp objects?
        ''This week, we talked about what we're going to get our parents and everybody for Christmas,'' Eli said.
        Did Peyton hint that he would love to find a Osi Umenyiora gift-wrapped under his tree, a Michael Strahan, or that he'd settle for a Mathias Kiwanuka? Anyone who doesn't confront the running of most N.F.L. backs like a drunken teenager in Pamplona?
        Amazing what a mood-altering experience life in the N.F.L can be. A month ago, Peyton and the Colts were 9-0 and answering questions again about the possibility of an undefeated season. Now they have lost three of four, all on the road, including last Sunday's 44-17 horror show against the Jaguars in which they yielded a ghastly 375 yards on the ground.
        Now the consensus of the network football evangelists is that the Colts are no Super Bowl team, with their defense in tatters and a playoff obstacle course that, among other American Football Conference powers, includes the unstoppable LaDainian Tomlinson and the San Diego Chargers.
        Asked how Peyton was holding up under the Colts' sudden reversal of fortune, Eli looked at me as if I had requested he sing the Ole Miss fight song in Chinese.
        ''He's fine, he's fine,'' he said. ''Peyton's going to be great.''
        Actually, Peyton was, as usual, pretty darn good in Jacksonville, throwing for 313 yards. But look where that got him, in the middle of a locker room that may soon have the warmth of a Tom Coughlin dinner party if the Colts' coaching staff, beginning with the head man, Tony Dungy, doesn't fix the defense.
        ''But there's time to salvage this thing before the window shuts completely on Indy's title hopes,'' Bob Kravitz, a columnist for The Indianapolis Star, wrote after the Jacksonville drubbing.
        If that window comes down, it'll be right on Peyton's ringless fingers, keeping Eli's hope alive of being first to finally carve the Manning name into the football winners' circle.
        It's an intriguing subtext to the brothers' relationship, which zips happily along like a perfect spiral but could get a bit wobbly when it comes to redeeming daddy Archie for all those professional defeats that shrouded the career of an all-American icon.
        In his third N.F.L. season, Eli is well known for his pleasant locker-room demeanor, for answering questions with sentences that aim to please, if not produce headlines. Interestingly, when asked yesterday if he and Peyton had a friendly family wager on who gets to the Super Bowl first, a gleam of resistance visited Eli's eyes.
        ''No,'' he said, emphatically.
        Do they ever talk about it?
        ''Never.''
        No one is trying to pit one against the other or would be foolish enough to argue that Eli, even with veteran growth factored into the comparison, would ever be the artist Peyton is. But there are levels of personal achievement and there are team-goal legacies, and fate, not fairness, often determines which of the two you get.
        Before the Donovan McNabb-less Eagles test the Giants' modest momentum Sunday, is it unreasonable to suggest that Eli, even on a wild-card team, would have as good a Super Bowl shot this season as Peyton in a conference whose current leader, Chicago, wishes it had a quarterback as good as Eli?
        That may not be saying much, but Eli seems to have weathered the four-week storm, even if his favorite targets, Plaxico Burress and Jeremy Shockey, can't stop evaluating him pass by pass on television every week. Down the stretch, Eli doesn't have to be Peyton, just the mistake-free manager of the last two weeks, provided the Giants' defense continues to get healthy and whole.
        ''You lose your two defensive ends and linebackers and defensive backs, things are tough,'' Eli said. ''That's how you start playing well, on defense. You have a pass rush. You get to the quarterback. He throws the ball up. Your cornerbacks and linebackers are able to get an interception. That's what gets you motivated. That's what wins and loses games.''
        Peyton undoubtedly knows that, without Eli having to tell him. Peyton, the improvisational genius whose body language at the line of scrimmage occasionally borders on manic, will become increasingly agitated if the Colts don't start tackling soon.
        It will be left to the always-tranquil Eli to remind big brother to drink his d-caff and tell him he still has the best arm in the neighborhood.
        Make it the nation, but even that isn't going to overcome 375 yards on the ground.
        SPORTS OF THE TIMES E-mail: hjaraton@nytimes.com
      