
        The three words ''uncertain regulatory environment'' would not seem that unusual in a public utility rate case.
        But when S. Bradley Van Cleve, a lawyer for the 34 biggest industrial customers of Portland General Electric, read testimony that an Oregon utility executive gave in late October, his suspicions were aroused. They were the same three words used in a report in September by Standard & Poor's, Portland G.E.'s credit rating agency, on the utility's financial health.
        Mr. Van Cleve sought a subpoena for all the correspondence between Standard & Poor's and the utility for the previous 21 months. Those newly disclosed documents open a rare window into the internal workings of the corporate credit rating business. As such, the documents raise questions about the independence and integrity of the rating services, whose reports are relied upon by millions of investors in choosing stocks and bonds.
        The documents show that Standard & Poor's solicited comment from the utility on a draft report and then made at least 48 changes that the utility sought before releasing its report on Sept. 25. Those changes included adding the words ''uncertain regulatory environment'' and a second crucial phrase supporting Portland G.E.'s request to shift all fuel-cost risks off its shareholders and onto customers. The utility then used the report as independent corroboration of its request to raise rates.
        Officials at both S.& P., a unit of McGraw-Hill, and the utility said they did nothing wrong, and the credit agency said all the changes were made in light of new facts. ''This was entirely routine,'' said Chris Atkins, chief spokesman for S.& P.
        The biggest credit rating services -- S.& P. and Moody's Investors Service as well as Fitch Ratings -- have been roundly criticized since they failed to publicly report the declining fortunes of Enron and WorldCom until it was too late. Congress, European securities regulators, investor advocates and even some rival credit ratings agencies questioned the independence and integrity of the credit rating system, in part because since the early 1970s the services have been paid by the very companies whose creditworthiness they evaluate.
        One Senate staff report noted that credit ratings ''have taken on great significance in the market with investors trusting'' the reports because investors assume that they are ''careful, unbiased and accurate.''
        Congress passed laws in 2002, 2005 and in October directing the Securities and Exchange Commission to get tough on the ratings agencies. An S.E.C. spokesman, John Heine, said the commission was still studying the issues and had not released new rules yet.
        The Oregon documents suggest that little has changed since the collapse of Enron five years ago.
        ''I thought I knew a lot about these guys, but this opportunity to edit I did not know about,'' said Lawrence J. White, an economics professor at New York University who has studied the rating agencies. ''Certainly we ought to know about it.''
        He said the Oregon case might prompt moves for change.
        ''Everyone knows that the companies issuing bonds pay for the privilege to put out their best story and so, is there a difference between pitching and editing?'' Professor White asked. ''It seems like a slippery slope.''
        In the Oregon case, first reported by Nigel Jaquiss of Willamette Week, the changes made by S.& P. cast increased doubt on the financial strength of Portland G.E., bolstering its case to raise rates, increase its profit margin and shift all fuel-price risks onto customers. The wording describing the utility's financial health was changed from ''somewhat weakened'' to ''weakened financial condition'' and the description of the issue of fuel costs was changed from ''important to ''critically important.''
        Most of the changes in the report are revealed in the e-mail exchanges between Leo Carillo, a Standard & Poor's analyst in San Francisco, and Kristin Stathis, the utility's assistant treasurer. But the e-mail messages also show that other changes resulted from telephone conversations.
        Mr. Carrillo did not respond to messages requesting comment. Portland G.E. said it would not allow interviews with its executives about these issues.
        The utility cited the report as independent corroboration of its request to raise rates by 9 percent and to shift all fuel-cost risks off shareholders. Portland G.E. is an independent company, but it was owned by Enron from 1997 until last April.
        Normally investors who rely on these reports never get any hint of what revisions are sought by companies whose finances are being evaluated. The rare glimpse into the shaping of the S.& P. report came about only because the final version became evidence in a regulatory proceeding where lawyers had discovery rights.
        S.& P. said that there was nothing unusual about the revisions, which it said were made in light of new facts and in accord with the standards of the International Organization of Securities Commissions.
        S.& P. acknowledged Friday that it met privately with each of the three Oregon Public Utility commissioners on Aug. 3, when the rate increase was pending. Two state lawyers sat in on the sessions, two of which lasted an hour each, but lawyers opposing the rate increase said Friday that they had been unaware of the meetings.
        S.& P., in a statement, said the meetings were proper because ''there was no discussion about the rate case'' and it was interested only in ''a greater understanding of the regulatory environment.''
        Spokesmen for the utility commissions in New York, Connecticut, New Jersey, Virginia and Florida said Friday that they did not have such meetings or could not recall any and several said they would consider such meetings improper when a rate case was pending.
        Jason Eisdorfer, a lawyer with the Oregon Citizens Utility Board, a consumer group, said any discussion about the regulatory environment was inherently about the rate case.
        Mr. Eisdorfer also said the release of the correspondence between Standard & Poor's and the utility ''was eye-popping to us.'' He added, ''We had no idea anything like this was going on, and we wonder how widespread it is.''
        Mr. Eisdorfer said he disagreed with Standard & Poor's assertion that most of the changes were factual, contending that they ''seem to be an attempt to influence a commission decision.'' ''This was meddling in the rate-making process,'' he added.
        In documents released last week, the staff of the Oregon Public Utility Commission determined that S.& P.'s Sept. 25 report was so compromised that ''it is impossible to conclude that S.& P. conducted a timely independent inquiry.'' A decision on the rate increase is expected early next year.
        Gail Brewer, a Portland G.E. spokeswoman, said the utility ''did not manipulate evidence'' and that ''we stand behind everything we have filed'' in the rate case as ''appropriate and accurate.''
        In a filing with the commission, the utility said that Industrial Customers of Northwest Utilities -- the group represented by Mr. Van Cleve that includes Intel, Boeing and Oregon Steel Mills -- had manufactured a controversy.
        Sean J. Egan, a managing director of Egan-Jones Proxy Services, a rating agency that is paid by investor groups rather than the companies it evaluates, said the documents illustrate a fundamental problem with allowing companies that issue stock and bonds to pay for evaluations by credit reporting agencies.
        ''Allowing substantial changes in the credit analysis that are not based on yourmisunderstanding of the business is crossing the line,'' Mr. Egan said, and ''is unethical and in our view illegal.''
        Egan-Jones has been lobbying to be treated by the S.E.C. on an equal footing as a credit rating agency.
        Both Moody's Investor Services and Fitch Ratings, said they, like S.& P., typically show advance copies of reports to client companies to check facts. The two agencies said they did not alter their opinions unless there were factual errors. Moody's said there were often many versions of proposed reports as it discussed them with client companies.
        Fitch, by far the smallest of the three, has a more rigid standard on changes. Its code of conduct states that a company being rated ''may not propose any drafting or editorial changes to the commentary.''
      