
        Testing a Community for Drugs
        A first step in fighting drug abuse in a community is knowing the extent of the problem. But finding out how many people are using illicit drugs, and what drugs they are using, can be difficult. Officials rely on crime statistics -- drug arrests and seizures -- and the occasional population survey to get a general idea.
        Few people would suggest testing every individual in a community for drug use, but what if there were a way to, in effect, test the population as a whole? Scientists led by Sara Castiglioni of the Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research in Milan have developed such an approach, which measures various drugs in wastewater.
        The researchers, who had previously devised a method to detect cocaine, expanded the technique to include various amphetamines and methamphetamines, including ecstasy; morphine; marijuana and related drugs; and methadone. They used liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, a method that can separate compounds in a mixture and determine how much of each the mixture contains.
        The technique was used on samples from two wastewater treatment plants, in Milan and Lugano, Switzerland. The researchers, who describe their approach in the journal Analytical Chemistry, said they were able to detect the drugs (and metabolites) at as low as 10 nanograms per liter. It made little difference whether the wastewater was treated.
        The researchers suggest that such testing could become a new tool for estimating the level of drug use in a community and for monitoring changes in use over time -- all while protecting the privacy of individuals.
        Spiders That Show Signs of Age
        The males of some bird species exhibit the equivalent of graying hair. As they age, the ultraviolet reflectance of parts of their plumage begins to vary. Birds have ultraviolet-sensitive vision, so females begin to see the males differently, which can affect their choice of mate.
        Invertebrates like some beetles and spiders have ultraviolet-reflecting body parts, too, and see in the ultraviolet range. Yet little is known whether their UV reflectance changes because of age or other factors.
        But a new study by Matthew L. M. Lim of the National University of Singapore and Daiqin Li of Hubei University in China shows that it does, for one invertebrate at least.
        The researchers studied a jumping spider, Cosmophasis umbratica, which has iridescent features on its carapace that reflect in the ultraviolet range. They collected immature males and measured the carapace reflectance 10 days after the final molt (that is, shortly after reaching adulthood) and compared the reflectance with that of older adult males.
        The study, published in The Proceedings of the Royal Society B, found a shift as adult males got older, to shorter ultraviolet wavelengths. The intensity of reflectance was also slightly less for older males.
        The researchers suggest several reasons that reflectance might change over time. The scales on carapaces, which consist of chitin, may degrade somewhat with exposure to sunlight, changing the reflectance characteristics. Male jumping spiders also tend to fight with each other, which may cause loss of some of the scales entirely.
        Whatever the reason, it's not known whether the change in reflectance affects the female spiders' opinion of older males. That's a subject for additional research.
        Early Mammal Found
        The fossilized remains of a mouselike mammal have been found in New Zealand.
        What's so exciting about that? New Zealand separated from the ancient continent Gondwana some 82 million years ago, and until now land mammals were thought to have arrived there only after humans did. But the mouse-size creature, which is 16 million to 19 million years old, indicates that mammals did exist there at one time. They likely died out several million years ago, possibly when the climate cooled.
        A report on the fossil by Trevor H. Worthy of Adelaide University in Australia and colleagues appears in The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
        As the Nano-Wheel Turns
        Scientists who are trying to develop molecular machines have spent a lot of time reinventing the wheel -- literally making wheels and gears from just a few atoms. The eventual goal is to use such components in nanoscale devices that can do useful work inside living tissue, perhaps, or as part of a tiny nonelectronic computer.
        But while they have reinvented the wheel, researchers haven't been able to turn it in the desired direction. ''We can put wheels on a molecule,'' said Christian Joachim, a researcher at the Center for Material Elaboration and Structural Studies in Toulouse, France, who has made tiny molecular ''wheelbarrows.'' ''But it's very difficult to control the direction of the wheel.''
        Dr. Joachim and colleagues have now come up with a way to do so. Their solution, reported in Nature Materials, involves a basic mechanical molecular rack and pinion. If you know something about cars, you know about a rack and pinion, which is used in many steering systems. The steering wheel rotates a shaft, at the other end of which is a circular toothed gear called a pinion. The pinion in turn sits on a rack, a straight bar with similar teeth. Rotating the pinion causes the rack to move left or right.
        Dr. Joachim and his colleagues used a single hexagonal molecule known as HB-NPB, consisting of 142 carbon, nitrogen and hydrogen atoms, as their pinion. The rack consisted of almost identical molecules that interlock to form a surface that meshes with the hexagonal ''teeth'' of the pinion.
        Using the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope, the researchers first maneuvered the pinion near the rack. (In effect, the tip serves the same function as the steering shaft). Then the intermolecular attractions known as van der Waals forces take over, fixing the pinion in place relative to the rack. The microscope tip is moved parallel to the rack, and the pinion moves with it, rotating as it rolls along the rack surface. Moving the pinion in the opposite direction produces opposite rotation.
        Dr. Joachim said that while being able to control rotation in this way was important, true molecular machines were a long way off. For one thing, he said, their technique uses the decidedly large (by molecular standards) microscope tip. One goal, he said, ''is to try to integrate all these mechanics inside one molecule.''
        Observatory
      