
        Q: As a co-founder of the Zagat guides, which invented the idea that every consumer can be a restaurant critic, what do you make of the news that New York has just become the first American city to go healthy by banning the use of artificial trans fat in restaurants? The better restaurateurs never used trans fat and find it inexplicable that there's an argument about it. They think it is not in their self-interest to feed people things that are likely to kill them.
        French fries from McDonald's are probably the iconic trans-fat product, with all that implies about good flavor and bad cholesterol. Every time you go to McDonald's, every kid in the country, no matter how young -- they eat trans fat, and they don't know they're eating it. By the time they're 20 years old, they're trans-fatted.
        Trans-fatted? Is that like being transgendered? Who knows? When I get going, I sometimes say things a little bit off the wall.
        Go ahead. Live it up. I want to say that Mayor Bloomberg is taking a strong position on public health, and there aren't enough people worrying about things like that. One of the mayor's first projects was taking on the smoking industry, and it took guts. Having Phillip Morris on your back is not fun.
        Tell us about the Zagat guides, which started in 1979 when you and your wife, Nina, circulated some mimeographed sheets among your friends, listing their favorite restaurants in Manhattan. Since then, we've covered the restaurants in 85 cities.
        It was a clever business idea to devise a series of guidebooks in which most of the labor -- the research and writing -- is done free by thousands of readers, who complete questionnaires at your request. Nick Negroponte, an Internet pioneer who happens to be an investor in my company, said that we were the precursor of interactivity. On the other hand, he said we didn't know what we were doing.
        Are there any new categories of guidebooks you are thinking of adding to the Zagat line? We might do a guide to books.
        Books as in fiction and literature? Yes.
        What use would that be? A numerical rating is not a substitute for bona fide literary criticism. If you look at movie critics side by side, or restaurant critics side by side, you find out that it's a very subjective business. They disagree all the time.
        But that's the point of criticism -- it offers the sharpness of an individual voice as opposed to a bland system of averages. Can't anyone write in to your restaurant surveys? They can write in, but that doesn't mean they get counted. They have to pass through filters. I don't want to have people cheating.
        How, exactly, do you filter out the cheaters, like restaurant owners who might send you glowing reviews on their own behalf? I could tell you, but I would have to kill you.
        Do you have a favorite restaurant? I never answer that question. Unlike Katherine Harris, I believe if you are going to run the election, you shouldn't be working for one candidate.
        How much do you weigh? You're going to ask me that?
        It seems relevant in the case of a professional eater. I weigh about 250 pounds. Sometimes I'm a little above, but I am hoping I am below right now. I haven't checked this morning. I'm 6-foot-2, and I would like to weigh 200 pounds, and that means I've got to go easy on desserts.
        What foods do you look forward to eating over the holidays? I like roast-beef ribs and all kinds of vegetables. I like plum pudding served with hard sauce or vanilla ice cream or both.
        In that case, you might be eating some trans fat soon. If I do, I probably won't know it.
        DEBORAH SOLOMON
        THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 12-17-06: QUESTIONS FOR TIM ZAGAT
      