
        As chairman of the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke is the nation's top inflation cop. When he expresses alarm -- as he has done of late over rising labor costs -- his concern drives policy, as it apparently did yesterday when the Fed's interest rate committee decided to hold rates steady in a bid to dampen inflationary pressures.
        But of all the reasons Mr. Bernanke might have for fretting about inflation, rising wages should not be one of them. For starters, wage growth is slowing, not rising. True, wages were up three cents an hour last month. But researchers at the Economic Policy Institute who measured wages over three-month periods found that hourly wages slowed from a 4.7 percent annual growth rate for June through August to 3.1 percent for September through November. Working Americans have more to spend lately, but that's not because of any big acceleration in pay; rather, it's because prices have eased, mainly for energy.
        Taking a broader view, the job market is -- unfortunately -- the last place one would look for signs of overheating in the Bush-era economy. Of the four economic expansions in modern times that have lasted at least five years, the current one has the worst job creation record by far. This year, job growth has averaged just enough to absorb the new job seekers entering the labor force each month.
        Which leads us back to Mr. Bernanke. Where does his fear about inflationary wage pressures come from? Perhaps the importance of establishing his inflation-fighting credentials is causing him to react strongly to any perceived threats. For instance, if workers took advantage of lower gas prices to spend freely elsewhere, inflation could conceivably break out. But there is not much evidence of that so far.
        Or maybe Mr. Bernanke is worried that pay raises in relatively strong job fields -- like engineering, law and health care -- will soon be passed on to consumers. Betting that companies will compel consumers, rather than shareholders, to foot the bill for higher salaries could prove to be a safe wager.
        Another good bet at this point is, sadly, that the economy will continue to downshift in 2007, removing any upward wage pressures that may exist. An economy that has not been good for jobs and wages during its strong growth phase is not likely to become so as it weakens.
        Editorial
      