
        An off-duty police officer was stabbed in the chest early yesterday at a popular Williamsburg diner filled with an after-hours crowd, the police said.
        By yesterday afternoon, the police had arrested a suspect, Luis DeJesus, 21, at his home on Knickerbocker Avenue in Bushwick, Brooklyn, and charged him with assault on a police officer.
        The stabbing took place after the officer, who was unarmed, arrived at Kellogg's Diner at Metropolitan and Union Avenues with three friends about 4 a.m., the police said.
        Witnesses said an argument between the officer's group and another group began when one person bumped into someone from the other party on his way to the bathroom.
        ''Basically, they exchanged some words,'' Theodora Fiotos, a manager at the restaurant, said, adding that the argument quickly escalated into a brawl. ''They were yelling and screaming and pushing each other.''
        One of the men wielded a folding knife, the police said.
        ''The cop was stabbed and everybody made a run for it,'' Ms. Fiotos said, adding that the three men who tussled with the officer left in a black Infiniti. A folding knife was found at the scene, the police said.
        It was unclear yesterday whether the officer, a 26-year-old who joined the department in July, had identified himself as a police officer during the brawl. The department did not release his name.
        The officer was taken to Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center, where he was recovering yesterday evening in stable condition, the police said. One of the officer's superiors, who visited him shortly after the fight, said that the officer was not intoxicated, the police said.
        Before the fight, the diner was bustling, with a line out the door. ''This place was really packed, they had to wait,'' Ms. Fiotos said. ''One of the guys in the cop's party was falling asleep on the counter.''
        After the fight, the diner was closed for several hours as the police dusted for fingerprints and interviewed witnesses. It reopened about 11:30 a.m.
      