
        Home and Hearth
        In November, the circus came to town and the Bulls were forced to hit the road. Chicago lost seven of eight away from the United Center and seemed to be struggling both on and off the court. Since the end of that trip, however, the Bulls have turned around and improved their record from 4-9 to 13-10. The turnaround has come largely at the United Center, where Chicago has won eight of nine games. Over all, the Bulls have won 10 of 11, making them the hottest team in the Eastern Conference. Ben Wallace has looked better of late and leads the team in rebounding, steals and blocks. Ben Gordon and Luol Deng are scoring about 18 points a game to lead the offense.
        The Question
        While the Sixers attempt to trade ALLEN IVERSON, whose nickname is the Answer, it appears that he was certainly not the answer to the team's problems this season.
        After a 5-3 start, Chris Webber, above, and the Sixers were sinking long before Iverson demanded a trade and was sent home. Since a win against the Heat on Nov. 5, the Sixers are 2-17, with Iverson leading the team in scoring 11 times. In that span, the team was 22nd in the league in scoring and 25th in scoring defense.
        The Sixers have had quite a history with nicknames with Julius Erving, who was known as Dr. J; Charles Barkley, the Round Mound of Rebound; and Andrew Toney, the Boston Strangler.
        Nothing but Net
        Listening to the daily podcast on thebasketballjones.net is like listening to a couple of your more knowledgeable buddies debating hoops and busting chops. The hosts J. E. Skeets and Tas Melas and the producer Jason Doyle, all Toronto natives, have been doing podcasts since last January. They have gone from one program a week to doing a 15-minute podcast Tuesday through Friday, and a half-hour show on Monday that features guests like Sports Illustrated's Kelly Dwyer and bloggers from sites like sactownroyalty.com and blogabull.com.
        The show is timely, informative and sometimes raunchy, but it is a great listen for those who love the N.B.A. The site also features betting advice and the occasional post, but the podcasts are the best reason to log on.
        FRED BIERMAN AND BENJAMIN HOFFMAN
        PRO BASKETBALL
      