
        The commissioner of New York City's Department of Environmental Protection defended her agency's handling of delinquent water bills at a City Council hearing yesterday. But she said she had decided not to ask the Council for authority to use more aggressive collection methods until the billing records could be put in order.
        The commissioner, Emily Lloyd, who took over the department 22 months ago, outlined several improvements that had already been made, including the establishment of a system of verifying addresses to ensure that buildings receiving water bills actually exist. Her department runs the city's vast water system.
        But Councilman James F. Gennaro, chairman of the Environmental Protection Committee, said he was disappointed that the steps taken so far had been so modest.
        ''We're looking for broad strokes and bold measures that will speak to these problems that have gone on too long,'' Mr. Gennaro said.
        An examination of the department's water billing records by The New York Times revealed that more than 21,000 water customers were two years or more behind in paying their water bills and collectively may owe the city more than $230 million. But the city has been unable to aggressively pursue those delinquent accounts -- or even distinguish among deadbeats, legitimate disputes and erroneous accounts -- because billing records are riddled with errors.
        Mr. Gennaro said that as a result of uncollected debts, water rates had risen higher than expected, in effect punishing those who do pay on time.
        While acknowledging that the records are so seriously flawed that many customers no longer have confidence in the system, Ms. Lloyd said that 90 percent of customers do pay their bills within six months of receiving them.
        Ms. Lloyd said that while the delinquent accounts represent less than 3 percent of the 826,000 accounts in the system, their debt is a substantial part of the department's lost revenues.
        At budget hearings this year, Ms. Lloyd asked the Council to give the department the right to place properties with delinquent water bills into lien sales to force owners to pay. The Council refused, fearing that billing errors could unfairly put an owner's home in jeopardy. The department was then given six months to come up with a plan to fix the system.
        Ms. Lloyd reported on the steps her department had taken since then. Among the most important changes, she said, were additional hours and better training for personnel in the department's call centers, which are often the first step in resolving a billing dispute.
        The department has also redesigned its bills, which were so hard to read that even Ms. Lloyd had conceded that she could not read her own bill. New overdue notices have also been designed with clear markings and a perforated section that can be sent back with payment.
        The department has signed a contract for about $500,000 with the consulting firm Booz Allen Hamilton to improve its rate of collections.
        Steven W. Lawitts, first deputy commissioner and director of the New York City Water Board, which sets water rates, said the department would also hire auditors to check delinquent accounts and determine which ones are uncollectible.
        The examination by The Times found numerous cases of water accounts still on the books for buildings that were torn down a decade ago or companies that are no longer in business.
        Mr. Gennaro was disturbed at the revelation at the hearing by Joseph F. Singleton Jr., a deputy environmental commissioner, that the department's billing and collections unit was understaffed by more than 35 full-time positions. He said he found that hard to believe, and urged officials to fill those positions as quickly as possible.
        ''If those extra positions are going to eliminate some problems and bring in more money, we should do that,'' he said.
        Property owners who appeared at yesterday's Council hearing said that the department had made some improvements and was more responsive than it had been.
        But many problems remain, said Alan Rothschild, a representative of the Community Housing Improvement Program, a trade association representing more than 2,500 apartment building owners.
        ''Virtually all building owners are perfectly willing to pay their fair share of water costs,'' Mr. Rothschild testified, ''as long as they are confident that D.E.P. is billing correctly.''
      