
        On a cold December evening this week, Robert Vasquez stood at the door of his home in Meriden, Conn., slowly shaking his head. No, he said, he had not carried out a terrible crime in 1992, was not the stranger who walked up to a young man on a street in Queens, asked him for marijuana, then immediately shot him to death.
        As Mr. Vasquez spoke, a young child climbed on his leg. A woman in the house urged him, over and over, to cut off a conversation with a reporter.
        Surrounded by his present, Mr. Vasquez lingered behind the screen door as if held there by the gravity of a moment long past, the muggy dawn on a Woodside street in the late summer of 1992, when one of the 1,995 people slain in the city that year fell to the ground.
        Asked if he had heard about the killing, near his home and involving people he knew as a teenager, Mr. Vasquez replied, ''I heard about a lot of people getting killed.''
        He had not, however, heard that he had recently been identified as a suspect in a new investigation into the murder of Leonard Aquino, 21, who had served in the Persian Gulf war.
        ''This is the first I'm hearing,'' Mr. Vasquez said.
        This morning, Joshua Rivera, a man sentenced to 37 years for the murder, is due to appear in State Supreme Court in Queens, at what may be the concluding moments of a negotiation to abort his prison term after 13 years.
        Over the last two years, the Queens district attorney's office has spoken with witnesses who say that they were in a car with the real killer, and that Mr. Rivera had nothing to do with it.
        Those same witnesses have told the authorities that the man who fired the fatal shots was Mr. Vasquez, making him at once the central figure of the reopened case and its virtual phantom: the purported right man in a wrong-man case.
        Mr. Vasquez has never been charged in the killing. Moreover, he said in an interview on Tuesday, he has never been questioned by Queens prosecutors. While the authorities privately acknowledge that they are prepared to cut 24 years off Mr. Rivera's sentence based on the new findings, they have given no indication that they intend to use those findings to act against Mr. Vasquez.
        Richard A. Brown, the Queens district attorney, declined to comment.
        Dressed in a sleeveless shirt, Mr. Vasquez spoke from behind a screen door for about 10 minutes with a reporter who had arrived unannounced at his home on a cul-de-sac.
        ''I had nothing to do with it,'' he said.
        His manner generally composed, his voice even, Mr. Vasquez went on to speak with familiarity about other people involved in the case. Around the time of Mr. Aquino's murder, he said, he was living in East Elmhurst -- the same neighborhood where one of the new witnesses has recently told of dropping off Mr. Vasquez after the shooting.
        He acknowledged that he moved out of the city soon after the killing, but said, without elaboration, ''The reason I left had nothing to do with that.''
        The case was reopened in 2004 at the request of Mr. Rivera, who wrote to prosecutors saying he had developed new information.
        The original case against Mr. Rivera had been built on testimony from two witnesses who had fleeting glimpses of what had happened. One of them, Paul Peralta, was himself wounded by the gunman, was drunk, and said that the entire event went by in ''seconds.''
        The recent witnesses, by contrast, said they had spent the evening with the killer, a long Friday night in Manhattan nightclubs that stretched until Saturday dawn.
        One of those witnesses, Jaime Acevedo, said he drove three men back to Queens, one of them a friend. Mr. Acevedo said he knew the other two men only by their nicknames, Aim and Everlast, and that they asked him to stop on 48th Street in Woodside. They got out of the car.
        Mr. Acevedo said that he, too, had gotten out of the car, unaware of what was about to happen. He heard shots and saw flashes. Then, he said, the man he knew as Aim rushed back to the car, crashing into him, dropping a gun, then bending to pick it up.
        In the car, Aim and Everlast discussed how Aim had walked up to the man and asked for marijuana, and then shot him, according to Mr. Acevedo. The other man in the car, Kenny Chong, gave essentially the same account to prosecutors.
        The authorities have identified Aim as Mr. Vasquez.
        On Tuesday evening, when asked about the name Aim, Mr. Vasquez did not speak for a moment, then said: ''Me? That's not me.''
        Was Everlast a familiar name?
        He nodded.
        ''I know Everlast,'' he said. Then he added, ''I know three Everlasts.''
        Kenny Chong?
        ''I know Kenny, but no last name,'' he said. ''We didn't go by last names then.''
        Did he remember a long night in Manhattan? ''Lots of nights,'' he said. ''Those were partying times.''
        His tone shifted just once. When he was told that Mr. Rivera was serving 37 years for the crime, Mr. Vasquez exclaimed, ''Thirty-seven years!''
        The woman standing next to him said, ''What?''
        They looked at each other in what seemed to be astonishment.
        ''Thirty-seven years for something that happened 14, 15 years ago?'' Mr. Vasquez asked.
      