
        Danielle Tauro did not break a record yesterday at the 53rd annual Bishop Laughlin Games, the biggest indoor high school track and field meet in the United States.
        But Tauro, 17, one of the nation's best high school runners, had plenty to smile about as she left the New Balance Track and Field Armory on 168th Street for the bus ride home to Manahawkin, N.J.
        ''It's special to run here,'' she said of the armory, renowned for its fast track and for being the home of the National Track and Field Hall of Fame. ''You see all the Olympians that have come here to run. It's motivating and inspiring.''
        Tauro hardly needs inspiration. She won last year's mile in the outdoor national high school championships in 4 minutes 39.25 seconds and has won the girls' high school mile at the Millrose Games and the Penn Relays. By capturing the 1,500 in the USA Junior Track and Field Championships, she qualified for the world junior championships in Beijing.
        But her career has not been without problems. Three weeks ago, Tauro left the finish line with mild kidney failure after collapsing twice in Van Cortlandt Park while leading the northeast regional qualifiers for the national cross-country championships in San Diego.
        After hobbling over the finish line in 10th, Tauro went to the hospital, where blood tests revealed she had rhabdomyolysis, a kidney condition associated with the breakdown of muscles.
        ''My body pretty much felt like it was shutting down,'' said Tauro, a senior at Southern Regional High School. ''I'd never been in that place. My left leg went numb and I was hopping on my right leg, glancing back to see who was behind me, and I stumbled.''
        Although Tauro qualified for the national meet, her condition was too serious for her to make that trip and try to top her sixth-place finish the year before.
        ''I think that this might happen to athletes more often than their coaches know,'' said Tauro's father, Victor, who is a doctor. Tauro's own doctor cleared her to resume training Dec. 9, and yesterday, a week later, she was at the Armory, anchoring her school's 3,000-meter relay team.
        ''I wasn't supposed to run here, but my teammate got sick, so I filled her spot,'' Tauro, who will attend Michigan next year, said while waiting in line for a smoothie after her race, a face in a crowd of more than 6,000 high school athletes at the meet.
        Athletes from 252 schools in six states participated in the meet, which filled more than 12 hours with deafening activity.
        There were 43 heats of six for the girls 300-meter run, some runners waiting their turn inside the oval while the rest curled out in a long line around the track.
        Each heat was on its mark as the previous one was finishing, and in some years the heats overlap, momentarily having two races on the 200-meter track simultaneously, said Ed Bowes, the meet director since 1983.
        There were 12 heats in the women's mile, with 20 to 23 runners in each heat. Bowes called the atmosphere ''organized chaos.''
        The Armory track is distinctive for its banked turns, which slingshot runners back down onto the straightaway.
        ''I love the banks; they feel like they push you forward,'' said Trisha Hawthorne, a 17-year-old-senior at Alexander Hamilton, who won the 55-meter sprint in 7.07 seconds.
        TRACK AND FIELD
        Correction:  December 22, 2006, Friday  A sports article in some copies on Sunday about the biggest indoor high school track and field meet in the United States misspelled part of the event's name. It is the Bishop Loughlin Games, not Laughlin. The article also incorrectly described rhabdomyolosis, the ailment that caused a leading runner, Danielle Tauro, to collapse at a cross-country meet in November. It is a breakdown of muscle that can often lead to the impairment of kidney function; it is not a kidney ailment associated with the breakdown of muscle.
      