
        When Kenny Lofton steps into the batter's box as the leadoff hitter in the Texas Rangers' season opener in Anaheim on April 2, no matter what he does at bat, he will walk into the record book. The Rangers will be the 11th team Lofton has played for in his major league career, tying Todd Zeile for the record for most teams played for by a position player.
        It is a record that Lofton would rather not share. Nor does he care to tie Mike Morgan's 12-team pitchers record by playing for yet another new team in 2008. The Rangers will be the ninth team Lofton has played for in seven seasons, and all he can say is ''why me?''
        Since playing for Cleveland in 9 of his first 10 full seasons in the majors, Lofton, a veteran center fielder/leadoff batter, has not played for any team for more than a season. His agent, Casey Close, has earned his fee lining up jobs for him.
        ''It's a tough situation, all the time trying to figure out where you're going,'' Lofton said. ''It's tough for me to have to prove myself every year, but I guess it's the nature of the game. They do it to some players, and I'm one of them. Most guys wind up getting two-, three-year deals consistently. For me, it's tough. I don't know why it's that way.''
        Lofton, who will turn 40 two months into next season, left the Indians after the 2001 season. He has had only one contract of more than one year since. He signed with the Yankees for two years, but they traded him to Philadelphia after the first season.
        Close said the Yankees gave Lofton a two-year contract because George Steinbrenner wanted him.
        ''It was good news, bad news,'' Close said. ''The good news was Kenny was paid $3.1 million, and he got a little more security. It was a good fit. The problem was Joe Torre had a very strong affinity and relationship with another center fielder named Bernie Williams. Kenny never had the opportunity to be an everyday player.''
        In the two years before he signed with the Yankees, Lofton split each season, playing for the Chicago White Sox and the San Francisco Giants in 2002, and the Pittsburgh Pirates and the Chicago Cubs in 2003. He went to the World Series with the Giants and to the Steve Bartman playoffs with the Cubs.
        ''Everybody wants something different, but when it comes time for teams to win, guess who's playing in August and September,'' Close said. ''He might face five left-hand pitchers until Aug. 1, but from Aug. 1 on, Kenny's in the lineup every day.''
        Lofton was in the postseason with the Yankees, too, his ninth visit in 10 years. He also made it this year with the Dodgers, but he had only one hit in 13 at-bats against the Mets after batting .301 during the season and stealing 32 times in 37 attempts, an 86 percent success rate.
        By comparison, Juan Pierre, 29, was 58 for 78, a 74 percent success rate, but the Dodgers gave him a five-year, $44 million contract to replace Lofton in center field and in the No. 1 spot in their lineup even though Lofton had a .360 on-base percentage to Pierre's .330.
        ''They wanted to bring him back,'' Close said, ''but they were a little concerned about his age.''
        Age, however, hasn't fazed Lofton. He has hit better than .300 each of the last two years, the first time he has done that since 1996-97. Is he getting better as he is getting older?
        ''I hope that's the case,'' Lofton said. What he knows is that his $6 million salary with the Rangers is his biggest since he earned $8 million with the Indians in 2001. ''I don't see why I couldn't have gotten paid more money before this,'' Lofton said. ''I went from my $8 million to $1 million. I thought I was worth more than that. I went to the World Series with the Giants in 2002 and almost didn't have a job the next year.''
        A primary reason Lofton was able to sign for $6 million this off-season was that Dave Roberts signed a three-year, $18 million contract with the Giants. ''They were born on the same day five years apart,'' Close said. ''Kenny said if Roberts is going to get $6 million a year, at the minimum he should get $6 million.''
        Lofton said it was one thing not to want to give him a multiyear contract. ''But give me some money to show I'm worth what I'm doing; I bring a lot to the game,'' he said. ''But I have to deal with it.''
        Miller Gets a Vote
        Unfortunately, he doesn't have a vote. George Steinbrenner, the reclusive Yankees owner, interrupted his self-imposed silence recently with a letter about an On Baseball column that advocated Marvin Miller's election to the Hall of Fame by the veterans committee.
        ''It was with a great deal of interest and agreement,'' Steinbrenner wrote, ''that I read your November 21 column 'Moment Is Right for Miller to Move from Ballot to Hall.'
        ''I too believe that Marvin Miller highly deserves to be elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame for the huge role that he played influencing the game and the business of baseball.
        ''I will support you in any way necessary or possible to see that his election is brought to fruition.''
        The last person Steinbrenner supported publicly was Phil Rizzuto. The veterans committee elected him in 1994.
        For Make Benefit Of
        A reader wondered about what would emerge if someone slightly misspelled Scott Boras's last name. Change the last letter to a ''t,'' and he would become Borat.
        Borat, the comic genius creation of Sacha Baron Cohen, is funny; Boras is not. But as disliked (sometimes feared) as he is by some owners and general managers, he usually does the job for his clients. Did he do the job for Daisuke Matsuzaka in his negotiations with the Red Sox?
        Given that his stated goal was for millions more than he got, Boras probably didn't do more than any other agent might have done. This is the way the negotiations went:
        Red Sox offered $36 million for six years. Boras said talk Oswalt money, referring to the five-year, $73 million contract ($14.6 million a year) that Roy Oswalt signed with Houston last summer.
        Red Sox raised their offer to $48 million. Boras said talk Oswalt money.
        Red Sox made a drop-dead offer of $52 million. Boras countered with $66 million. The Red Sox said no. Boras said uncle.
        Matsuzaka will probably be able to live on what he got, but he will have to wait until he is a free agent six years from now to see Boras at his best. That's when Boras throws his ''mystery team'' into the mix. General managers often suspect that there is no mystery team, but they're always afraid to call his bluff.
        No mystery team has ever identified itself, of course, because it has never signed the free agent, and if it actually existed it wouldn't want to admit that it failed. Maybe next time Borat will come up with a real mystery team -- from Kazakhstan.
        Matsuzaka's Particulars
        The extras in Daisuke Matsuzaka's contract are more interesting than the $52 million worth of salary and signing bonus:
        Once he spends one day on the Red Sox' roster, he has a no-trade provision.
        The Red Sox will pay the airfare for eight round trips a year between Boston and Japan.
        He will receive an annual housing allowance of $75,000 for Boston, $25,000 for spring training and a one-time payment up to $35,000 for moving.
        He will have use of a Lincoln Town Car or similar vehicle.
        He will have a personal trainer/massage therapist, a translator and a club employee to handle all Japanese news media needs.
        The Red Sox will not assign him to the minor leagues.
        His salary of $8 million in the third and fourth years, and $10 million in the fifth and sixth years, could escalate to $10 million and $12 million based on his finish in the voting for Most Valuable Player and the Cy Young award.
        He has the usual award bonuses ranging up to $500,000 for winning the Cy Young award or the M.V.P.
        McCourt Remains Mum
        Maybe it's the environment -- laid-back Los Angeles. Maybe he would have been tougher in a tougher environment -- Boston. But Frank McCourt bought the Dodgers, not the Red Sox, and he is what he is. What he is not is a fighter.
        McCourt, who has been described as not being a troublemaker, chose not to pursue a tampering charge against the Red Sox over the recent signing of J. D. Drew despite the urging of officials from other clubs.
        ON BASEBALL
      