
        Thank you for Harriet Brown's article on anorexia (Nov. 26). From the other side of the planet (far northern Australia), our family has a story achingly similar to Harriet's. We watched in stunned horror as anorexia transformed our bright, beautiful, happy 14-year-old daughter into a starving, terrified, angry and withdrawn child. Like Harriet, we treated our daughter using the Maudsley approach, taking full control of her diet until she was capable of doing it again herself. Despite anorexia's fierce resistance, a regime of good food and healthy weight gain lifted our daughter from the black pit of anorexia, and she has now resumed her normal, happy life.
        Tim Wood and Bridget Bonnin
        Cairns, Australia
        Harriet Brown's account of her daughter's struggle with anorexia gave me a ray of hope. Having worked with therapists and other health-care professionals to help my elder daughter through her eating disorder, we have returned to them for their advice, care and expertise as our younger daughter battles her own demons in her eating disorder. No parent should try to treat this illness alone. Brown's story does not stress enough the need to involve professionals with expertise in treating teens with eating disorders as essential partners with parents. It's a bewildering and exhausting journey, even with the best of professional care.
        Susan Smith
        East Moriches, N.Y.
        As a psychologist who encounters young girls and women with eating disorders, and their families, on a daily basis, I was troubled by the reference to a ''parentectomy'' as a descriptor of the more ''conventional'' approach to the treatment of anorexia.
        While not a proponent of Maudsley, I, too, see the family as ''the best chance a child has for recovery.'' However, as acknowledged in many other areas of parenting (and relationships in general), those closest to a person or most invested are often not best able to objectively address that person's problems. It is for precisely this reason that surgeons do not operate on their own children.
        Instead, we see food and eating as metaphors for deeper emotional issues, and accordingly, we ask parents to join their adolescent's treatment by committing to parenting and family therapy. In so doing, parents convey an openness to the notion that the marital and larger family dynamics also ''weigh in'' on the issues with which their children grapple.
        Of course, anorexia is a life-threatening disorder, and a child must reach a standard of medical and nutritional stability before she can effectively participate in, and benefit from, psychological treatment.
        Rebecca Harcsztark
        Director
        Intensive Outpatient Services
        The Koch Center
        Hohokus, N.J.
        As a social worker who has worked in the field of treating eating disorders since 1989, I was overwhelmed by the parents' love for their daughter and the lengths they took in order to get her on the road to recovery. This approach of refeeding is a wonderful way to make her feel safe by showing that she is loved and cared for. Too often anorexia is thought of as an illness that stems from issues of control. Children who develop eating disorders do so, in part, because they are feeling unsafe and unable to express feelings of sadness, anger, embarrassment or depression. For many who are unable to articulate or define their feelings, it is easier to say, ''I feel fat.'' And often we see families getting into power struggles around food and weight, rather than helping these children express their feelings.
        Part of society's misunderstanding of the illness is the belief that once treatment is given, the demons that Brown described go away. Families are better off knowing that the demons will always be there. Recovery is when the demons no longer control the behavior.
        Jennifer Kelman
        Boca Raton, Fla.
      