
        A MARKETER once known as much for its moral rectitude as its soaps and detergents is pushing further into the brave world of new media with a provocative effort asserting that men can suffer from menstrual cramps.
        Not long ago, the company, Procter & Gamble, would have shied away from a public discussion of women's menstrual cramps, much less sponsoring a playful campaign pretending that they afflict men, too. But times have changed, and even Procter, the nation's largest advertiser, is looking to push the envelope with viral campaigns online.
        Major marketers believe they can take greater risks online because Internet users tend to be younger and more accustomed to irreverent humor. Procter has already underwritten viral campaigns for mainstream brands like Folgers coffee, Crest toothpaste, Febreze fabric spray and ThermaCare heat wraps.
        Among other blue-chip advertisers running such viral campaigns are American Express, Cadbury Schweppes, Coca-Cola, Ford Motor, General Electric, MasterCard, Nike, Office Depot, PepsiCo, Unilever and Wendy's.
        The ThermaCare products intended to treat women with menstrual pain are behind the elaborate new campaign, known as ''Men With Cramps.'' The effort, with a budget estimated at $1 million, includes two special Web sites, a fake documentary and video clips, all purportedly the work of an imaginary institute that is studying the imaginary problem of ''cyclical nonuterine dysmenorrhea'' -- i.e., men with cramps. (There are traditional ads for the other types of ThermaCare products, with spending last year of about $35 million.)
        Procter is joining a growing list of mainstay marketers trying to reach consumers in nontraditional ways, including podcasts, blogs, video games, e-mail messages, cellphones, video-on-demand and ''pop-up'' retail stores that stay open only for a short time.
        Marketers are eager to experiment with those new methods because it is increasingly difficult to get the attention of busy, jaded consumers with conventional television commercials and print advertisements. Also, nontraditional campaigns can use technology that enables them to be aimed more precisely at the audiences that would most appreciate them -- and avoid those who might not get the joke.
        ''To differentiate ourselves, we're using more and more nontraditional media,'' said Bob Thacker, senior vice president for marketing and advertising at OfficeMax in Naperville, Ill., ''to connect in a more meaningful way'' with potential customers.
        OfficeMax, for example, is sponsoring 20 Web sites with humorous holiday themes, bearing fanciful addresses like stucktoapole.com and yougotelfed.com, along with a separate campaign for a new line of pens (tul.com), presented by a make-believe expert who runs a ''Graphological Analysis Centre and Pen Shoppe'' in Prairie du Chien, Wis.
        Laughs aside, mainstream marketers are finding that nontraditional initiatives in the new media like interactive campaigns can be fraught with risks. The pitfalls range from annoying consumers with content deemed inappropriate to being mocked by them for pretense or pretensions.
        For instance, Wal-Mart Stores abruptly shut down an online campaign called The Hub, which sought to emulate social-networking Web sites like MySpace that are popular with teenagers. The target audience considered the repeated mentions of Wal-Mart too self-promotional, and they disliked a feature that allowed parents to control what their offspring posted on the site.
        Executives at Procter and its agency, Publicis Worldwide in New York, part of the Publicis Groupe, acknowledged the challenges, but said the risks were worth it.
        ''You can imagine what it was like to take this to management,'' said Tom O'Brien, associate marketing director for personal health care at Procter in Cincinnati.
        But ''we simply didn't have enough women who knew about our menstrual product, and had to find a new way to connect with them,'' Mr. O'Brien said. ''And given how tough a subject it is, we had to find the right way to show women we empathize with them.''
        In research conducted before the campaign was created, women said again and again ''there was one group of consumers they would like to see understand more deeply what it meant to have menstrual pain -- men,'' Mr. O'Brien said.
        From that grew the idea that a humorous approach putting the shoe on the other foot, so to speak, would resonate with the female target audience, get them talking about ThermaCare and encourage them to forward elements of the campaign to friends and relatives.
        Those steps, known on Madison Avenue as buzz marketing or word-of-mouth marketing, are prized because data indicate that personal recommendations can be more effective than traditional advertising.
        ''Putting yourself out there is always scary,'' said David Corr, an executive creative director at Publicis, who worked on the campaign, ''but we had an idea people would like it.
        ''We felt that 'man bites dog' aspect would engage the consumer,'' Mr. Corr said, referring to the notion that men could suffer from menstrual cramps, ''because we do a lot of focus groups, and women always talk about men's inability to deal with pain.''
        The campaign began in late September and new elements were introduced in phases, weeks apart, to ''build a little mystery in Internet-land, and get people talking about whether men could have cramps,'' said Meredith Yacso, ThermaCare brand manager at Procter.
        The campaign started with small classified ads in newspapers around the country, which all carried the same eye-catching headline, ''Men: Are You Suffering From Menstrual Cramps?'' The ads directed readers to a Web site (menwithcramps.com), created by Kirt Gunn & Associates in New York, an agency that specializes in interactive campaigns.
        The ads generated some discussion on blogs, Web sites like rollingstone.com and even a segment of ''The Tonight Show With Jay Leno.'' Next came the fake documentary, also created by Gunn, which presented a mock tale of how male cramps affected the course of history. Gunn also put up a second Web site, under the name of the faux institution supposedly studying the syndrome, the MacInnes & Porritt Institute (macinnesandporritt.com), which sought volunteers for its research.
        Gunn also produced a series of video clips that pretended to show the results of the research, all featuring a double-talking academic in a white lab coat, Dr. Gerhardt Fardel -- actually, an actor and comedian named Ed Herbstman, who is also a partner at the Gunn agency. Mr. Herbstman interviews other comic actors who portray imaginary research subjects like a taxi driver and a bakery worker.
        The video clips and fake documentary were also put up on Web sites like ifilm.com, video.google.com and youtube.com.
        Last month, some references to ThermaCare were added to elements of the campaign to indicate it was actually for a product and not just an elaborate practical joke. For example, a banner ad on menwithcramps.com offers a link to the actual ThermaCare Web site (thermacare.com), where women are shown suffering from cramps.
        ''Every woman has imagined what it would be like if men had cramps,'' said Kirt Gunn, president at Gunn. Those involved in the campaign said they were pleased with the response so far.
        ''We're feeling great about the amount of overall buzz,'' Ms. Yacso said. For instance, the results for Google searches of the phrase ''men with cramps'' are yielding results ranging from tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands. Mr. O'Brien estimated that more than 11 million consumers have interacted with the campaign in some form, either visiting the Web sites, watching the video clips or reading blog postings.
        As for the effect of the campaign on sales, Mr. O'Brien and Ms. Yacso said it was too early to judge, but data from stores would be watched for results.
        Mr. O'Brien said the top managers at Procter were ''encouraging us to think beyond traditional models,'' adding that when the ''Men With Cramps'' campaign was presented to them, ''they thought the humorous approach was just right.''
        ADVERTISING
      