
        The lawyer for Yoko Ono's chauffeur offered his first defense in open court to blackmail charges yesterday, saying that Ms. Ono had pressured her driver to perform ''immoral and illegal'' acts and demanded that he be at her beck and call 24 hours a day, even to tuck her into bed at night.
        The chauffeur, Koral Karsan, said through his lawyer that John Lennon's widow was an abusive employer who grew more and more paranoid over the 10 years that Mr. Karsan worked for her.
        ''Miss Ono used and abused Mr. Karsan by pressing him to perform immoral and, in fact, illegal acts,'' Robert Gottlieb, Mr. Karsan's lawyer, said as Mr. Karsan stood next to him in handcuffs in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, where he pleaded not guilty to two counts of attempted grand larceny.
        Those requests ''escalated over the years,'' Mr. Gottlieb said as he presented a vigorous defense against charges that Mr. Karsan tried to extort $2 million from Ms. Ono.
        Mr. Gottlieb did not elaborate on what kind of acts the chauffeur considered ''immoral and illegal.''
        But after he was arrested a week ago, Mr. Karsan blurted out to reporters that Ms. Ono had accused him of blackmail in an effort to prevent him from filing a sexual harassment lawsuit against her.
        Elliot Mintz, a spokesman for Ms. Ono, declined to address Mr. Gottlieb's contentions in detail.
        ''My overall position on all of this is that I'm not going to be engaging in a war of words between Mr. Gottlieb's reckless assertions and my client,'' Mr. Mintz said. ''The fact of the matter is, Yoko is the victim.''
        Mr. Gottlieb said that Ms. Ono had a history of problems with her employees, which contributed to an ''unsettling insecurity and paranoia with respect to Mr. Karsan's employment.'' He told the judge, Michael R. Ambrecht, that Ms. Ono had kept Mr. Karsan on a very tight leash, requiring him to be available full time, even though her tax returns listed the driver as an independent contractor.
        Mr. Karsan ''was on call 24 hours a day, seven days a week,'' Mr. Gottlieb said. ''He tucked her into bed.''
        Mr. Gottlieb questioned Ms. Ono's ''credibility,'' saying it was the ''lynchpin'' of the case.
        Mr. Gottlieb's accusations came as prosecutors accused Mr. Karsan of having threatened to harm or kill Ms. Ono if she did not pay him $2 million in extortion money, and of plotting to break into her apartment in the Dakota and steal her valuable art collection.
        ''It's clear,'' the assistant district attorney, Anne Schwartz, said, ''that this defendant had been planning and plotting,'' against Ms. Ono.
        ''What's chilling,'' the prosecutor continued, was that in a search of Mr. Karsan's home in Amityville, N.Y., the police had found photographs on computer disks of all of the artwork in Ms. Ono's home, and of the windows, courtyard and roof.
        Mr. Gottlieb accused prosecutors of distorting the evidence. He said the photographs of Ms. Ono's home were legitimate photographs taken for insurance purposes, not to plan a burglary. He said that Mr. Karsan had kept the photographs because he was afraid that she might ''falsely accuse him of tampering with security.''
        Mr. Gottlieb said that Mr. Karsan was a professional, who served in the military, graduated from college and worked as a pharmacist in Turkey.
        Ms. Schwartz said Mr. Karsan, 50, was in the United States illegally, and was at high risk of fleeing to Turkey, where, she said, he was a member of a wealthy family in the textile business. She said prosecutors were astonished that after Mr. Karsan's first lawyer said he could barely scrape together $15,000 bail, Mr. Karsan had managed to provide $250,000 in cash overnight.
        Citing the immigration questions and Mr. Karsan's foreign ties, Justice Ambrecht consented to the prosecutor's request to deny bail and to hold him in jail until at least Jan. 11, when another hearing is scheduled.
        Mr. Gottlieb said that Mr. Karsan had strong ties to the United States through his wife, Fatma, and stepson, Mehmet Sengulen, 26, who were in court along with a dozen supporters yesterday. He said Mr. Karsan overstayed his business visa, which he received in November 1993 as an executive in the textile import-export business, because he was the victim of a fake immigration lawyer, A. K. Dogan.
        Mr. Dogan, who was Turkish, pleaded guilty in 1996 to posing as a lawyer, and has since died, Mr. Gottlieb said.
        Mr. Gottlieb said that Mr. Karsan had paid his taxes, and that the expired visa was a technical matter of improper paperwork, and not evidence of any intent to hide or to violate the law.
      