
        A PAIR of oversize cardboard cutouts of Lance Armstrong loom over the lobby of Carmichael Training Systems. On the business's Web site, Mr. Armstrong beams in the well-lighted foreground while Chris Carmichael, his longtime coach and the company's founder, looks on from the rear.
        Mr. Carmichael has long been the man behind The Man. The best coaches often are wizards behind curtains, visionaries who can see in people what they can't yet imagine in themselves. A year after he met Mr. Armstrong, Mr. Carmichael had helped create a Tour de France winner in the headstrong competitor. For his chutzpah and hard work, he has been repaid many times over because, as Lance Armstrong's star rose with seven Tour victories, Carmichael Training Systems, an Internet-based coaching business, took off.
        Mr. Carmichael admits as much. ''I know in the coaching world a lot of people say, 'Oh, Carmichael is lucky because he works with Lance -- Carmichael wouldn't have anything that he's got without him,' '' he said, his voice rising. ''I kind of nod my head and go, 'Yeah.' ''
        But now Mr. Carmichael has a new book, one that all but declares his willingness to move beyond Mr. Armstrong and seize an identity wholly his own. The book, ''5 Essentials for a Winning Life: The Nutrition, Fitness, and Life Plan for Discovering the Champion Within,'' represents Mr. Carmichael's transformation from renowned coach of endurance athletes to guru for the overstuffed and underexercised.
        It's not just a diet book, but a holistic ''performance plan'' that attempts to pair just the right amount of whole foods to fuel each day's training or recovery. Besides nutrition and exercise, Mr. Carmichael recommends heeding three other ''essentials'': work (get fit to be better respected), relationships (start engaging your family) and health (have routine checkups).
        ''What's key is looking at the whole deal,'' Mr. Carmichael said over lunch at a trattoria here. ''You can't go: 'Hey, I want to get fit. I want to lose weight,' without going, 'Hey, what is my relationship with my spouse and my kids?' ''
        Mr. Carmichael, a married father of three, argues that lifestyle changes stick only when there's an emotional payoff -- be it more energy with the kids, more spontaneous sex or fewer outbursts at work. ''If you're strong in all those five essentials, you can continue to perform in life, whether in athletics, in your career or in relationships,'' he said.
        The timing of his first book for a general audience represents his push to another level in dispensing coaching advice. ''Lance was going to retire,'' said Kevin Dessart, the marketing director for Carmichael Training. ''We needed to establish the company on its own. Everything for the first few years was Lance, Lance, Lance.''
        Now everything is Carmichael, Carmichael, Carmichael.
        Mr. Armstrong's endorsements gave Mr. Carmichael bankable credentials. After their first Tour de France victory in 1999, he founded Carmichael Training with four employees in Colorado Springs. It now has a staff of more than 100 on site, satellite coaches and 3,000 clients.
        In the last six years, Mr. Carmichael has helped write a cookbook and four books about his training philosophy. The books and his columns in Bicycling and Outside magazines helped secure his fan base among amateur endurance athletes.
        Mr. Carmichael also has seven $9.99 iPod workouts, available online, that allow amateurs to ride the Tour at home. Since July, there have been 60,000 downloads, Mr. Dessart said. Nutrition newsletters, by in-house dietitians, are e-mailed weekly to 60,000 subscribers.
        In September, streaming video on trainright.com, Carmichael Training began offering behind-the-scenes conversations with top coaches that have the feel of morning talk-show banter.
        And in October, Mr. Carmichael became the host of ''Me vs. Me,'' a half-hour on the Fine Living Network, available in 41.4 million households, during which a professional coaxes an inept aspirant into competence in a sport like golf or windsurfing.
        The budding empire has attracted the attention of other coaches. Sam Callan, who oversees coaching education at USA Cycling, had wondered how Carmichael Training Systems would sustain itself after Mr. Armstrong's exit from racing. ''Was CTS going to collapse or reinvent themselves?'' Mr. Callan said. ''They have obviously reinvented themselves.''
        Refocusing to appeal to the pudgy and overworked rather than just endurance fanatics is a sound plan, Mr. Callan said. ''There are a lot more folks out there that fall into the category of 'I want to start to get fit.' ''
        In August, Mr. Carmichael opened a coaching center in Asheville, N.C. Four more will open next year, in Tucson; Santa Barbara, Calif.; Louisville, Ky., and the Lehigh Valley area of Pennsylvania.
        Mr. Carmichael grew up in Miami, where both his parents were doctors. He skipped college to become a professional cyclist and eventually made the 1984 Olympic team. He didn't consider coaching until a skiing accident and four surgeries shortened his right leg by an inch.
        He prizes bluntness and likes to razz his trim, lithe staff members, who all seem to drink from an unseen fountain of youth. At 46, Mr. Carmichael -- who has a tan, boyish face and who looks (deceptively, it turns out) as if he gets plenty of sleep -- fits right in.
        It was Mr. Armstrong, he said, who inspired him to think bigger when the cyclist decided, ''he can take what he's done in elite performance to the cancer community and really motivate and mobilize an army to stamp out cancer.''
        Similarly, Mr. Carmichael said, he could present to the masses the five essentials he used with top athletes. ''We can use this as an opportunity to change America, and not just a little small segment of it, but everybody,'' he said.
        But there may be risks to extending the Carmichael brand. ''He needs to be careful of coming down to the lowest common denominator,'' said Jeff Bliss, the president of the Javelin Group, a sports marketing firm in Alexandria, Va. ''If he starts talking to grandmothers, he may lose his brand focus and brand relevance.''
        In ''5 Essentials,'' Mr. Carmichael and his co-author, Jim Rutberg, walk a fine line. On the one hand, the test to gauge aerobic capacity is a mile walk -- laughable to marathoners, but not easy for the truly sedentary. On the other, Mr. Carmichael also recommends interval training. Not for the fainthearted, it is a kind of aerobic conditioning that requires alternating strenuous efforts with rest.
        He believes that low-intensity, sweat-free exercise isn't enough to improve endurance and power.
        That may well be true, but not all overweight desk jockeys want to perfect their aerobic engine. Nor is strenuous exercise required to augment health, said Dr. Harvey Simon, an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School. ''I spent many years of my practice trying to get people to exercise aerobically, let alone do interval training,'' said Dr. Simon, the author of ''The No Sweat Exercise Plan.'' ''It was a flop.''
        James O. Hill, the director of the Center for Human Nutrition, endorses the idea of linking diet and exercise to relationships. For the few able to maintain weight loss, tying ''other important things in their life'' to dietary and activity changes is ''probably one of the keys to their success,'' said Dr. Hill, a founder of the National Weight Control Registry. But, hecautioned, ''the research isn't there yet.''
        Where Mr. Carmichael may overstep is in his sex advice to men. In ''5 Essentials,'' he suggests that ''good food yields great erections.''
        Not so, said Dr. Abraham Morgentaler, a urologist at Harvard Medical School. There is no evidence that if a man with erectile dysfunction ''starts eating carrots and greens, he'll end up having an improved erection,'' said Dr. Morgentaler, the author of ''The Viagra Myth.''
        It remains to be seen whether Mr. Carmichael has broad appeal. And is it enough for Mr. Carmichael to consult with nutritionists, doctors and exercise scientists, as he did for ''5 Essentials,'' and to not have the requisite degrees? How much does 16 years of experience designing the training and diet regimens of world-class athletes count for?
        A lot, said Ed Scheetz, the chief executive of Morgans Hotel Group, who has worked with Mr. Carmichael since 2001. ''Chris is a know-it-all but he doesn't come off as one,'' he said. ''He does a very good job whether you're at the Lance Armstrong level or the recreational level.''
        Jeff Spencer, Mr. Armstrong's Tour de France chiropractor, said Mr. Carmichael's skill is communication. ''The hallmark of any successful coach is to be able to extract the essential elements and teach that to others,'' said Dr. Spencer, who has a master's degree in exercise science.
        To test the nine-week program, Carmichael Training gave the book to roughly two dozen volunteers in the Colorado Springs area in January. They checked in at Carmichael every three weeks.
        Jill Ciolli, a schoolteacher and the mother of four, said she found it easy to follow. ''This was a 'For Dummies' book,'' said Mrs. Ciolli, 36, a former soccer player who said that she relished losing 23 pounds and getting back her wind. Mrs. Ciolli remains committed to the program, chiefly because her brother was diagnosed with diabetes not long ago.
        Another participant, Gregory Mark Pitel, a defense contractor, credited the program with increasing his energy, lowering his cholesterol and persuading him to try vegetables his wife had been pushing for years.
        Mr. Pitel, 46, who said that he lost roughly 26 pounds in 9 weeks, was partly motivated by the check-ins. Once they were over, he lapsed during a high stress period at work. But he has recently started following the book again. ''I've done it before and I know it works,'' he said.
        Correction:  December 28, 2006, Thursday  Because of an editing error, an article last week about Chris Carmichael, the trainer who helped Lance Armstrong win the Tour de France seven times, misstated the chronology of their professional relationship. Mr. Armstrong won his first Tour in 1999, nine years after meeting Mr. Carmichael; he did not win it a year after they met.
      