
        DONNY GEORGE knew it was time to leave Iraq, and his position as the director of the priceless collection of antiquities at the National Museum in Baghdad, the day last spring when an envelope containing a message and a bullet was dumped in the driveway of his mother's house. The intended recipient was his teenage son, Martin, accused of being flippant toward Islam and too friendly, same as his Christian father, with the American interlopers in Baghdad. The senders demanded a written apology and $1,000 in United States currency.
        Mr. George's terrified wife, Najat, persuaded him to write the apology and pay the money. Next he retired from the museum: he had heard through the grapevine that he would be forcibly terminated if he did not. And then, furtively, and in two shifts, he got his family out of Iraq and into Damascus last summer.
        Better to be jobless and homeless than terrorized, kidnapped, humiliated or worse. With fundamentalist Shiites now in charge of antiquities preservation, Mr. George, who said his former, purely nominal membership in Saddam Hussein's defunct Baath Party (not to join meant having no museum career) was another cause for persecution, knew his authority as president of the Iraqi State Board of Antiquities and Heritage was not just imperiled. It was nonexistent.
        ''We always as Christians in Iraq felt like second-class citizens,'' explains Mr. George, an archaeologist with a fondness for blue jeans, fly-fishing and drums (in college he played in a band renowned for Baghdad's best Pink Floyd and Deep Purple covers). The drums have been in mothballs for decades: too subversive.
        ''This was the story all the time, even during Saddam,'' Mr. George adds from his office at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, where he has joined the anthropology department as a visiting professor. ''But now it is much worse. Iran is just exporting the Islamic revolution to Iraq and using the excuse of the American occupation to divide and weaken us. Nobody is safe. There is killing like never before. These people are criminals operating under the name of Islam. My country is destroying itself.''
        Mr. George says he met Mr. Hussein just once, at an archaeological site in Babylon in 1987. The ruler questioned a translation of an ancient text, saying it should be less literal and more colloquial. No can do, Mr. George replied. Mr. Hussein relented.
        That the Pentagon failed to protect the National Museum during the three days of looting that followed the initial United States invasion still aggravates him: ''It caused destruction.'' The museum now resembles a mausoleum more than a cultural institute. ''If there is a large-scale civil war,'' he says, ''the building will be left to face its destiny. For me, as an archaeologist and specialist, I am crying for my field.'' But not for himself.
        Mr. George, 56, chubby and articulate, with a spiky gray hairdo and a faint mustache, is one of the more fortunate exiles: he was not homeless or jobless for long. This month he, his wife and Martin, the youngest of his three children, relocated to Long Island and he started at Stony Brook.
        Continuing the search for looted relics will also occupy his time. Mr. George is busy negotiating safe passage for a headless Sumerian statue, circa 3 B.C., that turned up at a Munich auction house. He has not, as was rumored at the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities, his ex-employer, sought political asylum. ''I don't want political asylum,'' he says. ''I'm not a political personage; I'm an archaeologist.''
        Fittingly, his office chair on campus looks to be a relic of mid-'60s mod: the frayed fabric is tangerine orange, the wooden armrests worn to a nub. Doesn't matter to him. ''As long as it doesn't collapse under me,'' he says.
        In Iraq, adds Mr. George, whose sense of whimsy has not deserted him, it is a law that no object can be considered an antiquity unless it is 200 years old. A ''heritage material'' clause identifies objects younger than 150 years as possible future antiquities; if the United States has a similar provision, this chair qualifies.
        So, how does one make the transition from a fearful existence in a war zone (he carried a pistol and took different routes to the museum to avoid ambush) to suburbia? With relief.
        Mr. George has rented a house in Setauket and hopes to bring his other two children, Steven (a computer scientist) and Mary (a medical student), to Long Island next year from Syria. All three of his children are fluent in English. ''I call them the generation of the Internet,'' he says.
        His wife, whose language skills will be supplemented by lessons next month, is adjusting to the move as well; shopping has proven an enticement. They have been to Wal-Mart, Target and Best Buy (for PlayStations), and Mr. George, noticing the proliferation of holiday decorations along the Route 25A corridor, intends to place electric candles in his windows.
        ''It's a good expression of happiness.''
        THE ISLAND E-mail: theisland@nytimes.com
      