
        Perhaps no corner of the White House has starred in more movies and television shows than the Situation Room, the presidential decision center under the West Wing that Hollywood imagines as a high-tech beehive of activity, where presidents command covert operations around the world.
        In reality, it was something of a low-tech dungeon.
        Until it closed for its biggest overhaul since John F. Kennedy settled into its wood-paneled conference room, most of the room's monitors used -- get this -- picture tubes. Communications were often by fax. The computers and telephones looked like the best technology available, in 1985. There was a small kitchen, but it had no sink.
        On Dec. 27 the new Situation Room is to open formally, the result of planning that reaches back to before the Sept. 11 attacks but took on added urgency afterward. The White House offered a preview to two reporters on Monday, days before its new data center is pumped full of classified information and its doors are sealed to outsiders.
        Even in its new incarnation, it is not quite up to the standards of ''24.'' But it is getting closer. For starters, Mr. Bush's new main conference room, just underneath the main floor of the West Wing, has six flat-screen televisions for secure video conferences, and the technology linking them to generals and prime ministers around the globe makes it less likely that the encrypted voices and images will go black. (That happened regularly in connections to Baghdad, an event one former administration official said had been known to ''prompt a presidential outburst.'')
        The screens also have what Joe Hagin, the deputy White House chief of staff, described in a tour as ''John Madden telestrators,'' the ability to perform on-screen drawings.
        (White House technologists settled on NEC plasma flat-screens for the president's main conference room and LCD screens, made by LG, in the remainder of the chamber.)
        The watch officers, who were previously seated so they stared at walls rather than each other, are now arrayed on two tiers of curved computer terminals that can be fed both classified and unclassified data from around the country and the world. That ends a problem that most multi-national companies solved years ago, an inability to merge different kinds of data without effectively having to cut and paste.
        The Situation Room was largely an outgrowth of the Cuban missile crisis, an event that made President Kennedy and his aides realize that they needed a central hub for information during crises.
        Since then, it has been the site of critical decisions: Lyndon Johnson spent long nights picking bombing targets there; Bill Clinton used it to handle Bosnia and the Asian financial crisis. Over the years, the technology became a patchwork of fixes, as Wang word processors were replaced by personal computers, and then for portable secure video. The 9/11 commission found that on the day of the 2001 attacks, communications frayed, making it hard for Mr. Bush, flying around on Air Force One, to get a picture of what was going on.
        Mr. Hagin, a trusted aide who handles much of the behind-the-scenes work of the White House, said officials decided a complete overhaul was desperately needed almost as soon as they saw it.
        ''We were all underwhelmed the first time we walked into the Situation Room,'' he said in an interview at the White House on Monday, an assessment shared by others.
        But, Mr. Hagin said, after the Sept. 11 attacks the project took on added importance, as officials came to realize that the room, created in the cold war, was not set up to gather both international and domestic information.
        Among the most important changes, Mr. Hagin said, was the expansion of its use beyond the National Security Council to also include the Homeland Security Council and the White House chief of staff's office.
        Officials found the old room's wood-paneled walls too noisy, making it hard to hear for those listening in via video or telephone. The new room has less mahogany and more of what Mr. Hagin described as 21st century whisper wall.
        And, where the old Situation Room suite had only two secure video rooms, the new one has five and a direct, secure feed to Air Force One, a better fit for Mr. Bush personally.
        ''This president wants to look you in the eye while you're answering his questions,'' said Phil Lago, executive secretary of the security council who is also planning the renovation.
        Correction:  December 21, 2006, Thursday  A picture on Tuesday of the White House Situation Room before the room was remodeled carried an erroneous agency affiliation for the photographer, Eric Draper. He is with the White House, not Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images.
      