
        Out West, where the scoring is fast and furious, the trade rumors involving Allen Iverson are running just as rampant.
        Last season, the Indiana Pacers wanted to fulfill Ron Artest's trade request but did not want to deliver him to an Eastern Conference opponent. Similarly, the Philadelphia 76ers would probably rather ship Iverson to a Western Conference team.
        But it appears -- at least for now -- that Iverson will not be joining Artest in Sacramento. Two hours before the Kings played the Golden State Warriors, Gavin Maloof, a Kings owner, said they were out of the Iverson sweepstakes.
        ''We're not in the running,'' Maloof said in a telephone interview. Although his brother Joe, a co-owner, had told The Sacramento Bee the day before that ''we're in the mix,'' Gavin played down the involvement as being one-sided.
        ''I don't know if we ever were,'' Gavin Maloof said. ''They contacted just about every team; we were just another team that they contacted. I don't think it really got that far.
        ''Obviously, he's a great basketball player. I'm a fan of his, like everybody else, but it just didn't happen for us.''
        The Warriors were not willing to declare themselves out of the running, but that only fits with the team's executive vice president for basketball operations, Chris Mullin, and his reluctance to make public comments.
        At least four Western Conference teams remain interested in Iverson, according to several executives in the league: Denver, which expressed interest in acquiring Iverson last season; Memphis; Minnesota; and the Los Angeles Clippers. In the East, Boston and Indiana are interested.
        Artest's situation differed from Iverson's in that he demanded a trade through the news media (which earned him a $10,000 fine), and the Pacers put him on the inactive list.
        ''It wasn't frustrating me at all, I guess because they were paying me,'' Artest said Tuesday night. ''I wanted to play, but they said I couldn't play and I couldn't do anything about it. I just had fun in L.A.''
        Artest's saga dragged out seven weeks until the Kings, who had denied they wanted him, made the deal.
        Iverson is also on the inactive list. Ed Snider, the chairman of the Sixers' parent company, Spectacor, said on national television that the team would try to trade him and that it had Iverson's locker cleaned out.
        Several executives said they believed a deal would come by the end of the week, after the Dec. 14 deadline passes enabling players who signed contracts over the summer to be included, perhaps in a multiteam deal.
        Iverson is making $17.1 million this season and $40 million over the next two. The salaries of players in a trade would have to match within 25 percent.
        With Sacramento, a deal would likely have included point guard Mike Bibby and the second-year standout Kevin Martin, along with a player with an expiring contract, like Vitaly Potapenko. But Martin has been the Kings' most consistent player this season.
        The Warriors' second-year guard, Monta Ellis, has been compared to Iverson, and Golden State seems hesitant to relinquish him. A swap for Baron Davis may make the most financial and basketball sense, but it could also hinder Ellis's backcourt development.
        PRO BASKETBALL
      