
        JENNEY--Robert M. Robert M. Jenney of Palm Beach, Florida and Houston, Texas formerly of Brookline, Massachusetts died peacefully in his sleep on December 11, 2006. He is survived by his wife, Olive McCollum Jenney and his three children, Pamela Jenney Taft and her husband, Edward A. Taft of Los Altos, California, Susan Jenney Bushman and her husband Robert P. Bushman III of Houston, Texas, and Charles S. Jenney and his wife, Caroline of Ponte Verda Beach, Florida and their four children, Mr. Jenney's grandchildren; Austen, Madison, Robert (Beau) and Alexandra; and children of his late sister Elizabeth Jenney Culver; his nephew, Henry Harrison Culver, Jr., and nieces Mrs Churchill (Martha Culver) Matthews and Lisa Culver all of St. Louis, Missouri. Mr. Jenney is also survived by his four stepchildren; Lutcher Luis Brown, Leonard L. Brown, Frederico L. Brown and Emily Brown, seven stepgrandchildren and one step - great - grandchild. Mr. Jenney was the fifth generation of the Jenney Family to head the family-owned Jenney Oil Company, Inc. which was founded in 1812. In the 1960's, Mr. Jenney spearheaded a successful drive to save the Old Colony Railroad when it discontinued service to the Massachusetts South Shore for Rail Mass Transportation. As an oilman this call for an alternative for transportation other than automotive highways was unique. Born in Boston in 1918, he graduated from Harvard University in 1941. He served in the U.S. Navy in World War II from 1941-1945 becoming a Lt. Commander. He served as a Director of three prominent New York Stock Exchange companies. He was a member of The World Presidents Organization and served as Director from 1973-1977 and President in 1976. As Chairman of the Francis Ouimet Scholarship Fund's effort, Mr. Jenney was instrumental in obtaining the issuance of a U.S. Commemorative Postage Stamp to honor Mr. Ouimet as America's first golf hero. There will be a private Memorial Service. In lieu of flowers, contributions may be made to the American Heart Association, P.O.Box 3049, Syracuse, NY 13220 -3049.
      