
        CALI--Angelo. Educator-Humanitarian. Angelo R. Cali of Montclair, NJ died Friday, December 8th 2006. Predeceased by his wife Mary in 2003, he is survived by his brother John James, his children John, Angela, Joanne, and his five grandchildren, Rachel, Jason, Greg, Ian and Jake. Born June 16, 1915, Angelo grew up in the mountains of Trinidad, Colorado. After moving east with his family, he attended Passaic High School in New Jersey. He received a Bachelor of Arts Degree in 1936 from The Montclair Normal School (now Montclair State University) and worked towards a Masters Degree in anthropology at Columbia University. He served as an officer of Military Intelligence in World War II, and continued as an active member of the 3rd Armored Division Association. He was an ardent supporter of education. For three years he served as Director of Adult Education in Clifton, increasing its enrollment tenfold in one year. For four years he served on the South Orange/Maplewood Adult School Board. He served as President of Essex County Mental Health Association for three years and as Vice President of the State Mental Health Board for two years, serving on the Board a total of 30 years. He was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Laws Degree from Montclair State College in 1979 for exemplary contributions in the field of education. He and his wife were devoted attendees and patrons of the New York City ballet for over 40 years. Angelo's numerous journeys to Sicily portrayed his love and enthusiasm for his Italian roots, love for his extended family there, and a passion for the ancient civilization preserved in the archeological dig of Morgantina. In addition to his passion for Sicily, history and anthropology, he was an enthusiastic golfer and found great comfort and camaraderie in his membership at the Montclair Golf Club as well as the Indian Wells Country Club in California. Angelo was a member of the Board of Directors of Cali Realty Corporation from the time of the company's initial public offering on the New York Stock Exchange in 1994. Prior to that, he was a principal of Cali Associates in 1949, along with his brother John and close friend Ed Leshowitz. Until his death, Angelo served on the Advisory Board of Mack-CaliRealty Corporation, formed by the 1998 merger between Cali Realty and the Mack Companies. Angelo had a devotion to the University of Pennsylvania's Research team pursuing a cure for FOP, a disease that afflicts his beloved grandson, Ian. In lieu of flowers he requested that any contributions in his memory be made to the International F.O.P. Association, P.O. Box 196217, Winter Springs, FL 32719. Angelo will be profoundly missed by his large family and countless friends. A memorial service will be held Saturday, December 16th, 11 am at Montclair State University's Kasser Theatre. The address is 1 Normal Ave, Montclair, NJ 07043
      