
        MAKI--John M., died December 7, 2006 at SunBridge Care and Rehabilitation, Hadley, Massachusetts. He was born in Tacoma, Washington on November 19, 1909. He was adopted in 1919 by the late Alexander and Amanda (Bradley) McGilvrey, having been raised by them since infancy. He received his B.A. and M.A. in English literature at the University of Washington in 1932 and 1936, and his Ph.D. in political science at Harvard in 1948. During the Second World War he served with the Foreign Broadcast Intelligence Service of the Federal Communications Commission and in psychological warfare planning with the Office of War Information. Immediately after the war he served in the occupation of Japan with the Government Section of GHQ, Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers, as part of a staff of American civil servants and military personnel who effectively wrote the Japan Constitution. During his academic career he was with the University of Washington from 1948 to 1966, when he left to join the faculty of UMass at Amherst. At both universities he was presiding officer of the faculty senates, president of the local chapters of Phi Beta Kappa, and a leader of the local chapters of the American Association of University Professors. At UMass he was also chair of the original Program of Asian Studies, vice dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, campus coordinator of the Hampshire Community United Way campaign, and active in the establishment of the sister university relationship with Hokkaido University. He was active in the establishment of the sister state relationship between Massachusetts and Hokkaido. He was also the first president of the New England Conference of the Association of Asian Studies. He was the author or translator of nine books and co-author of one. He was awarded an honorary LL.D. by Hokkaido University in 1976, the Order of the Sacred Treasure by the late Emperor of Japan in 1983, and the Chancellors Medal by UMass at Amherst. He was preceded in death by his wife, Mary, in 1990. She contributed immeasurably to his success through her support and inspiration. He is survived by sons John A. of Bothell, Washington, and James P. of New Bedford, Massachusetts, and one granddaughter, Jessica. Remembrances may be made to the UMass Amherst Library Archive Fund for the preservation and restoration of archives (http://www.umass.edu/development).
      