
        GOMPRECHT--Robert Feeley. The Society of the Friendly Sons of St. Patrick in in the City of New York, records with profound sorrow the death of Robert Feeley Gomprecht, a life member of the Society and extends sincere sympathy to his family. Alfred E. Smith IV, President Henry F. White Jr, Historian
        $(6$)GOMPRECHT--Robert F. New York Medical College is saddened by the loss of our colleague, Dr. Robert F. Gomprecht, clinical professor of medicine. He will be remembered as a devoted teacher and a compassionate physician. We extend heartfelt condolences to his family. Ronald F. Poe, Chairman Board of Trustees Ralph A. O'Connell, M.D. Acting President Provost & Dean, School of Medicine
        $(6$)GOMPRECHT--Robert Feeley, M.D., of Bronxville, New York and Boca Raton, Florida on December 17, 2006. Adoring husband and friend for 60 years to Kathleen, devoted and loving father to Robert (Alanna), Jane, Ann Skrzypczak, Ellen Reich (Doug) and Paul (Lisa), grandfather to Robert Gomprecht (Paula), Christopher Gomprecht (Diana), Amy Gomprecht, John Skrzypczak, Christopher, Kyle and Kevin Reich, great grandfather to Matthew, Kristina and Luke Gomprecht. Born March 6, 1924 in the Bronx, to Charlotte and Clarence Gomprecht, he graduated from Fordham Prep in 1941, Fordham University in 1944, and New York University College of Medicine in 1947. Air Force Captain 1951 to 1953. Appointed Director of Medicine and Chief of Cardiology in 1961 Misericordia (Our Lady of Mercy) Medical Center in the Bronx. He held these positions until 1981 and continued to practice Internal Medicine and Cardiology until his retirement in 2004 at the age of 80. Professor of Medicine at New York Medical College. Attending Emeritus at Our Lady of Mercy Medical Center and attending in Medicine at Westchester Medical Center. Member of the Friendly Sons of St. Patrick and the Knights of Malta and a Trustee of St. Joseph's Church, Bronxville. His patients considered him not only a caring and extremely competent physician, but also a friend and confidant. He trained hundreds of physicians in the art of medicine and to this day they still refer to him as their ''Professor.'' He was loved and adored by his family and friends who will miss his love, wisdom and humor. Calling hours at the Fred H. McGrath & Son, Funeral Home, Bronxville between the hours of 2 to 4 and 7 to 9pm Tuesday and Wednesday. Mass of Christian burial St. Joseph's Church, Bronxville on Thursday December 21 at 10am. In lieu of flowers, the family requests that donations be made to either Fordham Preparatory School, Bronx, New York or Fordham University, Bronx, New York.
      