
        SOLOMON--Jeanette. Selfhelp Community Services deeply mourns the passing of Jeanette Solomon, a wonderful friend whose philanthropy touched the lives of the elderly men and women in our care. Our heartfelt condolences to her family. Victor A. Wyler, President Stuart C. Kaplan, CEO
        $(6$)SOLOMON--Jeannette Congregation Emanu-El of the City of New York records with deep sorrow the death of our devoted, long time and cherished member, Jeannette Solomon. To her family and loved ones, we express our deepest sympathy. May they find strength and comfort in the sacred beauty of her memory. Rabbi David M. Posner Marcia Waxman, President George Asch, Secretary
        $(6$)SOLOMON--Jeannette R. The partners and staff of Peter J. Solomon Company, L.P. mourn the death of Jeannette R. Solomon, beloved mother of our Chairman, Peter J. Solomon. As a frequent visitor to the firm from its beginnings in 1989, Jeannette Solomon shared her intelligence, independence and spirited persona with us. A strong and vivacious personality, her presence with us was always accompanied by her lively wit and humor. We often benefited from her perspective on whatever subject she chose to discourse on. She was truly a fun person. Mrs. Solomon lived a long and eventful life, contributing her innovative ideas and energies to several charitable organizations, a legacy carried on by her family. We at the firm express our deepest sympathies to Peter Solomon, his brother Dick, and their families. Kenneth T. Berliner President Peter J. Solomon Company
        $(6$)SOLOMON--Jeannette. On December 18 2006, in her 98th year. Wife of the late Sidney L. Solomon. Mother to Richard and Peter. Mother-in-law to Ann and Susan. Grandmother to John and Abby, James and Vanita, Joshua and Geula, Abigail, Kate and Dan. Great-grandmother to Sara Rebecca Menemsha, Rachel and Lincoln. Sister to Irving and the late Norman and Sidney. A friend to many. Friends may call Tuesday evening, 7-9pm at Frank E. Campbell, 1076 Madison Ave. at 81st St. Services Wednesday December 20th, 11am at Temple Emanu-El, Fifth Ave at 65th St. In lieu of flowers, contributions may be made to a charity of your choice.
        $(6$)SOLOMON--Jeannette. We mourn the loss of our beloved Jeanette, who joined the AICF in the early 1960s as the leader of the dynamic Women's Division. We cherished her wisdom and enthusiasm for talented Israeli students in the arts. As a Board member she served with elegance and generosity. We who knew her send our warmest thoughts to her loving family. Vera Stern, Meira Geyra and all her friends at the America-Israel Cultural Foundation
        $(6$)SOLOMON--Jeannette. The officers, Board of Directors, and staff of UJA-Federation of New York mourn with profound sadness the passing of Jeannette Solomon, beloved mother of Richard and Peter. Jeannette was a cherished leader of the Jewish community whose generous contributions to the Women's Campaign, strengthen and enrich the lives of millions of people around the globe. The Solomon family has set a shining example of philanthropic leadership and deep devotion to the Jewish community, and have left a legacy of hope for countless individuals touched by their generosity. We extend our heartfelt condolences to her children, Richard and Ann and Peter and Susan; and to the entire family. Morris W. Offit, President Susan K. Stern, Chair of the Board John S. Ruskay, Exec. VP. & CEO.
      