
        HEAP--Ian Roger. Ian Roger Heap passed away just after midnight on Saturday December 16th, 2006. He was the beloved husband of May Wager Heap. Born in 1925 in Manchester, England, he was educated at Bury Grammar School. He served in the Fleet Air Arm of the Royal Navy from 1944-1947 as a Sub Lieutenant (A) RNVR pilot trained by the U.S. Navy. Although he was raised by his widowed mother in industrial Manchester and was not extensively educated he went on to succeed as a captain of industry. His business career was in property/casualty commercial insurance company management. From 1947 through 1963 he worked in Canada for Commercial Union. In 1964 he moved to the U.S. and became a citizen. He curled on the NY team in the nationals while living in Bronxville, NY. He later lived in Wellesley Hills, MA, and Summit, NJ. He spent some time living and working in the United Kingdom and more recently in Bermuda. He was the first Chairman and CEO of XL Capital Ltd which was formed in 1986 in Barbados and shortly thereafter relocated to Bermuda. Ian later became a Director and eventually an Advisor until 2006. He was also the President and first CEO of Mid Ocean Reinsurance Company, which was formed in 1992 with the help of investment by XL and which later merged with XL. Ian and May moved to Savannah, Georgia where they lived at The Landings. They were founding members of St. Peters Episcopal Church on Skidway Island. Ian served the church in several capacities, including First Mission Council and later as Senior Warden and Capital Funds Campaign Chairman. He was a former member of Baltusrol Golf Club and a member of The Landings Club. He is survived by his children: Lesley Eyre of Palmdale, California; Daintry Cleary of Gainesville, Florida; Diane Davey of Maplewood, New Jersey; and Ian R. Heap, Jr. of Savannah, Georgia. His family also includes his sons-in-law and his daughter-in-law: David Eyre, Christopher Cleary, Ian Davey and Meg Heap. His grandchildren are Daniel and Jennifer Dezotell, Jaime and Eric Patlovich, Clarice and Peter Davey and Ian III and Charlie Heap. He was also survived by his brother, Geoffrey W. Heap of Victoria, British Columbia, Canada. After being hospitalized twice for esophageal and stomach issues, he underwent surgery on Friday, December 8th, 2006. Initially the surgery was a success, however, his heart gave out a week later and he died in his sleep. The service will be Wednesday, December 20, at 10:00 a.m. at Saint Peter's Episcopal Church in Savannah, Georgia. Please keep his soul in you prayers. Please sign our guest book online at www.foxandweeks.com, Fox and Weeks Funeral Directors Hodgson Chapel.
      