
        BALDING--Polly Potter, 99, Pioneer Sportswoman. Polly Potter Balding died peacefully at her home in Camden, S.C. on December 6th, 2006, just three days after her 99th birthday. Mrs. Balding was a pioneer sportswoman, a competitive golfer and bridge player and a crack shot well into her 90's. An avid fox hunter and steeplechase rider, she rode in the first Ladies Race at the Meadowbrook Hunt Club on Long Island. She helped set a new standard for women in the 1920's, wearing trousers and riding astride while her contemporaries were still riding side-saddle in skirts. She loved to go fast and jump big fences, once even riding a race despite a broken collar bone, recalled Austin Brown, retired racing steward at Delaware Park. Skilled and competitive, she was often in demand to ride for various horse owners. Living a life that spanned most of the 20th century and beyond, Mrs. Balding was both ahead of her time and a Product of it. She was born in New York City in 1907 to Mary Barton Atterbury and J. W. Fuller Potter. She attended the Chapin School in New York City and the Fermata School in Aiken, South Carolina. In Aiken, she honed the riding skills that would lead her to become an inspiration to succeeding generations of horsewomen. She lived through two world wars, the first landing on the moon and three marriages. Her first husband was Peter Baldwin of Bedford, NY. With her second husband, Joe Sheffield, of New Haven, Connecticut, she moved to Camden, South Carolina in 1945. Mrs. Balding, while holding fiercely to old fashioned values of good manners, compassion, and loyalty, maintained a thoroughly modern openness to fresh ideas, books and movies, as well as people of all ages, values, and backgrounds. Her zest for the outdoors and the sporting life was unusual for a woman of her generation. Her lifelong love of quail hunting was driven primarily by the joy of watching her hunting dogs work. When asked about the secret of her longevity, Mrs. Balding would reply, Faith, drinking lots of water, and good genes. Her sense of humor, many suspect, played a role as well. Mrs. Balding was the loving wife of the late Ivor G. Balding, a professional polo player and later thoroughbred trainer for the famed stables of C.V. Whitney. She was the beloved mother of three daughters, Oklahoma State Senator Penny Williams of Tulsa, Helen Bonsal of Glyndon, Maryland and Cassie Kernan of Bedford, New York, as well as the cherished grandmother of nine grandchildren, eleven great-grandchildren, a brother, Jeffrey Potter of E. Hampton, Long Island, NY, and three dogs. A memorial service was held Monday, December 11th, 2006 at 11:00 am at Grace Episcopal Church, Lyttleton Street, Camden, S.C. Donations in her Memory may be made to the Walter Crowe Animal Shelter, 460 S. Fair Street, Camden, SC 29020.
      