
        BARNES--Winifred (Winnie) Davenport. A fiercely independent, selfdescribed perpetual student, died unexpectedly on November 30th from complications of brain cancer and stroke at age 88. Born in Newberry, South Carolina and raised in Norristown, Pennsylvania, Winnie arrived in New York City in the early 1940s, newly wed to Dr. Lloyd T. Barnes of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. While raising three daughters, she returned to school to complete the education denied to her in her youth because of her gender and race. She began her studies at Columbia, then New York University, where she earned a bachelors and masters degree in early childhood education, later teaching at The Dalton School and neighborhood public schools on the upper east side. Winnie also was a student of finance and investments at Temple University, the Bank of New York, and the New School for Social Research, as well as a student at GIA. With her husband of 50 years, she relished month-long trips to the exotic, including China, Russia, Japan, India, Iran, Egypt, Italy and France, each time making an extended study of the arts, crafts and culture of the region, including cooking and culture classes at the China Institute and Asia Society. She learned to handcraft rugs of oriental and middle eastern design by the latch hook method. After the death of her husband in 1993, Winnie devoted herself to the Hunter College Religious Studies program, where, immersing herself in study of religions of the world, she came to be regarded as a godmother to the religion program. Winnie served for 12 years on the board of the coop where her family resided for over 50 years, and was regarded as queen of the building. She was a long-time member of The Riverside Church, where her service included chancel flower chairperson, and arts and crafts department co-chairperson. Both Winnie and her husband were active members of the Boule and Reville Clubs. Winnie is survived by three daughters: Dr. Wyndolyn Barnes of San Francisco, California, Dr. Diane Barnes of San Rafael, California, and Winifred (Bonnie) Barnes of Pamplin, Virginia; two siblings, Judge Horace A. Davenport of Norristown, Pennsylvania, and Katherine Williams of San Francisco; and 11 grandchildren and 16 great-grandchildren. A celebration of her life will be held at The Riverside Church, 490 Riverside Drive, New York City, on December 27th at 2 pm. All are welcome. The family asks that no flowers or gifts be sent. Donations may be made in her name to American Friends Service Committee, 1501 Cherry Street, Philadelphia, PA 19102 or Southern Poverty Law Center, 400 Washington Avenue, Montgomery, Alabama 36104.
      