
        HOROWITZ--Sidney L, D.D.S., died peacefully at his home in New York City on December 13th. He was the beloved husband of Helen; dear father to Deborah, Rebecca, Sarah, and Ann; loving grandfather to Angela and Carly; devoted stepfather to Jeffrey Bronheim and Elizabeth Semler; and beloved stepgrandfather to Georgina, Darcie, Samantha, and Nathaniel. As a faculty member at Columbia University School of Dental and Oral Surgery for more than 25 years, he served as Associate Dean, Vice Dean and the Robinson Professor of Dentistry. He was co-author of a seminal textbook, ''The Nature of Orthodontic Diagnosis'', and the author of numerous scientific papers. A mentor and teacher to several generations of future dentists, Sidney was widely respected as one of the city's leading orthodontists. Always wise, gentle, and loving, he will be deeply missed. Memorial service: Sunday December 17th, 2 pm, Plaza Community Chapel, 630 Amsterdam Ave at 91st St. $(6$)HOROWITZ--Sidney L, D.D.S. Former Vice Dean of Columbia University College of Dental Medicine (CDM) and Dr. Edwin S. Robinson Professor Emeritus of Dentistry, passed away on December 13, 2006. Dr Horowitz received his B.S. in 1942 from Columbia's College of Pharmacy and the D.D.S. from New York University in 1945. Following active service in the U.S. Navy, he returned to Columbia for a Certificate of Training in Orthodontics (1949). With the exception of a five-year stint as Associate Director of the Cleft Palate Program at the NYU Medical Center, he remained a member of the Columbia family until his retirement in 1991. Dr. Horowitz also served as Director of the Division of Orofacial Growth and Development at Columbia University CDM. Along with pioneering and important research in the field of craniofacial anomalies and their treatment, and in orofacial growth and development, he authored a textbook and more than 50 scientific articles. In 1979 Dr. Horowitz was named Associate Dean for Academic Affairs, and served in that capacity through 1988. In 1985, he was appointed the Edwin S. Robinson Professor of Dentistry, and in 1988 became the Vice Dean of CDM. An endowed lecture in his name was established at the College of Dental Medicine in 1991 in honor of his commitment to scholarship and research in the area of craniofacial growth and development. An active clinician throughout his career at Columbia, Dr. Horowitz practiced orthodontics in Manhattan. He was an invaluable member of the CDM faculty and an outstanding example of its leadership and excellence. Our thoughts and prayers are extended to his wife Helen, his daughters, and family members. A memorial service will be held on December 17, 2006 at 2:00 pm at the Plaza Jewish Community Chapel, 630 Amsterdam Ave (at 91st Street), NYC. Ira B. Lamster, D.D.S., M. M.Sc., Dean Allan J. Formicola, D.D.S., Dean Emeritus Thomas J. Cangialosi, D.D.S., Director, Division of Orthodontics Columbia University College of Dental Medicine
      