
        PARADISE--Melvin Harry. December 27 1916 -December 2, 2006 of heart failure. Mel was a man for all times. He related to everyone, young and old, and had an energy and vitality that spoke to who he was. No one could not be affected by a Mel encounter. He was born and raised in New York City and had a deep loyalty and love for his town. He grew up in Washington Heights and the West Side of Manhattan, and had a reputation as one of its greatest hand ball players. He was a gifted athlete, and excelled in any sport that he played. Mel was the offspring of German and Russian Jews and always said that, that was a dynamite combination. He went to New York University, studied journalism and was on the boxing team. He thought his future would be in the family business, which was advertising, but it was not to be. Mel married his childhood sweetheart, Helen Koenig. It was now a time of war. Having received his orders the two of them moved from Army camp to Army camp until he received his overseas orders. Mel was a Warrant Officer in the 394th Field Artillery Battalion which landed in Normandy immediately after the first days of the Allied invasion and eventually participated in the liberation of two concentration camps in Germany. Mel created the pioneering James Roy Inc, the discount furniture showroom. Starring in his own television commercials for ten years made him a celebrity and he could not walk down the street without someone recognizing and greeting him. Mel and Helen had two children; James Roy, a producer, director, and actor, and Stephanie Gwen, owner of the New Age Health Spa in Neversink, New York. Upon retirement, Mel divided his time between Florida and New Age Health Spa. He lost his bride in 1995 after fifty four years of marriage. He had extremely close relationships with his grandchildren Samantha Kate, Elizabeth Ruth, Olivia Helen and Noah Connor. He saw them often and was able to participate in everything. He is also survived by his four great-grand children; Ben and Ella Mallinger and Gabe and Jack Melville Paty. Mel had a loving relationship with his sister Geraldine Hoffman who also survives him. Till the day he died she always called him brother. He was a handsome, gracious, true gentleman who adored women. A man's man. He brought love and light and fun into our lives and things will not be the same on this planet without him. We all love you Melville Harry Paradise.
      