
        The Palestinians seemed to edge toward open civil conflict on Friday as Hamas, the faction that controls the government, accused its rival, Fatah, of trying to assassinate the prime minister. Gunmen from the two factions clashed in the streets, wounding at least 30 men.
        Fatah denied that it had tried to kill the prime minister, Ismail Haniya. But the accusation and shooting raised the stakes in the bitter confrontation between Fatah, the faction that is led by the Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas, and controls branches of the security forces, and Hamas, the radical Islamic group in charge of most of the government.
        ''What a war, Mahmoud Abbas, you are launching, first against God and then against Hamas,'' a Hamas leader, Khalil al-Hayya, told tens of thousands of Hamas supporters at a rally at a sports stadium in Gaza City.
        Hamas staged rallies in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank to mark the 19th anniversary of its founding. The injuries occurred outside a mosque in Ramallah, in the West Bank.
        In recent years Palestinian factions have periodically battled one another, but they have always stopped short of all-out confrontation. The violence and the heated oratory in recent days, though, have increased talk about such a confrontation, or even the possibility of a Palestinian civil war.
        The clashes on Friday came on the eve of an important speech by Mr. Abbas, who was expected on Saturday to spell out his plan for ending months of political deadlock. Hamas said it would boycott the speech, to be delivered in Ramallah.
        Friday's events were an extension of a strange episode on Thursday, when Israel demanded the closing of the border between Egypt and the Gaza Strip to stop Mr. Haniya from returning to Gaza with tens of millions of dollars in cash after a tour of the Middle East.
        Hamas officials have been secretly taking suitcases of cash into Gaza because Israel, the United States and the European Union have cut off the flow of money to the Palestinian government since Hamas came to power, saying it is a terrorist group.
        On Friday, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said in an interview with Reuters that she planned to request tens of millions of dollars from Congress to help Mr. Abbas's security forces.
        The border standoff, which lasted seven hours, quickly turned into an internal Palestinian battle. Hamas gunmen stormed the Rafah border terminal in southern Gaza to support Mr. Haniya, who was stranded on the Egyptian side. The Hamas gunmen first clashed with the Palestinian security forces, who are loyal to Mr. Abbas. Later they battled Egyptian security forces on the other side of the frontier.
        Mr. Haniya was eventually allowed to enter Gaza after leaving the money with Hamas officials who stayed behind in Egypt. As Mr. Haniya was leaving the border area in the back of a pickup truck, his convoy came under fire. In the truck, one bodyguard was killed and one of Mr. Haniya's sons and one of his political advisers were wounded.
        At a news conference in Gaza City, Hamas alleged that Muhammad Dahlan, a powerful Fatah member of parliament and a former security chief in Gaza, was behind the shooting. ''Muhammad Dahlan bears the direct responsibility for the assassination attempt which targeted the prime minister,'' said Ismail Radwan, a Hamas spokesman.
        Mr. Dahlan already had an extremely tense relationship with Hamas. He was responsible for crackdowns against the group when he was in charge of the preventive security force in Gaza in the 1990s. Mr. Dahlan is from Gaza, the Hamas stronghold, but now spends much of his time in the West Bank.
        He rejected the charge. ''Hamas's allegations are simply a means of masking its failures towards the Palestinian people,'' Mr. Dahlan said. ''The Hamas government is fully responsible for yesterday's events.''
        In Gaza City, Hamas gunmen waged a brief battle with security forces aligned with Fatah near Mr. Dahlan's home. No injuries were reported.
        In his speech at the Hamas rally in Gaza City, Mr. Haniya described the shooting a day earlier. ''When my convoy started moving there was fire from all over,'' he said. ''The youths formed a human shield around me. Then this martyr fell directly next to me,'' a reference to his slain bodyguard.
        Mr. Haniya said his government had the names of those involved, but he did not divulge them, and did not blame Fatah or any other group by name. ''We are going to give these names to the minister of interior and we are going to implement the law,'' Mr. Haniya said.
        In his remarks, Mr. Haniya said Hamas's achievements since its founding in 1987 included two uprisings against Israel and the withdrawal of Israeli soldiers and settlers from the Gaza Strip.
        While he also noted Hamas's political successes in winning parliamentary elections and heading the government, he suggested that those were less important. ''We have joined this movement to become martyrs and not ministers,'' he said, referring to the willingness of many Hamas members to die for their cause.
        Friday's violence centered on Ramallah, where Hamas supporters tried to march to the city center following midday prayers at one of the main mosques. Security force members aligned with Fatah used batons to beat and push back demonstrators.
        The security forces also fired into the air, and later into the crowd, according to witnesses. Hamas supporters threw stones and bottles. Several of the wounded suffered gunshot wounds.
        The Hamas-Fatah tensions, and other internal Palestinian disputes, have been growing worse for months, and this week appeared to mark a new low, with several deadly shootings.
        In an attack that outraged Palestinians, unidentified gunmen shot to death three brothers, ages 3 to 9, as they were being driven to school on Monday. The boys were the sons of a Fatah member, Baha Balousha, who holds a senior post in the security forces.
        Mr. Abbas, meanwhile, faces the difficult task of trying to resolve the political standoff at a time of almost daily internal violence. After months of negotiations between Hamas and Fatah on a national unity government, he said recently that the talks had reached a dead end.
        Aides to Mr. Abbas say the president has been considering a range of options. The Palestinian Basic Law, which effectively serves as a constitution, does not say exactly how such a political crisis may be resolved. One possibility, according to aides, is that Mr. Abbas could call a referendum on whether the Palestinians should hold new presidential and parliamentary elections.
        The president has the power to dismiss the current Hamas government, but a new government would need approval by the parliament, which is dominated by Hamas. Mr. Abbas might call for new parliamentary elections, but Hamas says he does not have the power to do so.
        Mr. Hayya, the Hamas leader who spoke at the Gaza City rally, said his faction would not accept a referendum or new elections. Hamas won parliamentary elections in January, and the parliament is supposed to sit for four years.
      