
        SOME people celebrate their birthdays by going to a spa. Some have big parties. Others update their life lists, those nagging inventories of tasks to be completed before shuffling off this mortal coil.
        I had a life list until recently, when I submerged myself in a 55-degree swimming pool for the longest two laps of my life. For the next week, I lay awake at night wondering if I should swim the English Channel. Was I being too ambitious? Would I have to gain 40 pounds of insulation? Was that really worth it? I would have to buy new clothes. Didn't Thoreau write that we should beware of any venture requiring new clothes? I chucked the life list and signed up for an Ambien prescription.
        For the last decade, however, I have celebrated my December birthday by trekking to the Loehmann's flagship store on Seventh Avenue in Manhattan. Loehmann's, founded in Brooklyn in 1921, is the fabled discount clothing store with about 60 branches across the country.
        In a bit of poetic irony, Loehmann's was bought earlier this year by an investment firm based in Dubai, the luxe-loving city-state that is also the last place on the planet where a Loehmann's might exist. The company plans to expand the chain, giving it a much larger national presence, including a new flagship in the Ansonia on Broadway, which will open next year.
        Loehmann's offers a birthday discount, which has evolved into one of those retail legends, sort of like the Saks Fifth Avenue frequent buyer program, which rewards Saks cardholders with a big fat gift card (redeemable only at Saks) at the end of the year. A friend of mine, a seriously hedonistic consumer, received one for $8,500 at the end of last year, which made me wonder how much she had spent in the first place.
        I'm a bit more frugal, so I settle for the Loehmann's deal: for four days before and after your birthday, you get 15 percent off anything in the store. (You have to have an Insider Club card, but that is free.)
        The cashiers also hand out discount coupons like candy, so unless you are really retail-challenged, you will get at least another 10 percent off. This makes for a tasty inducement, especially when you may find big game, like the Valentino floor-length coat in orange wool with a mink collar for $1,000, marked down from $5,000, now owned by a friend.
        A word of caution: Loehmann's is not a place to go with any notions of necessity in mind. You will not find a pair of plain black pants. You will not make friends with the sales staff. What you will find is 60,000 square feet of mostly junk, its treasures sometimes hidden in plain sight, sometimes on the racks at the dressing rooms on their way back out into battle.
        Loehmann's is home to the misfit toys of the retail world, the ''designer'' clothes and purses you've never quite heard of, or the major designers who have had a sketchy year. I'll never forget the year Badgley Mischka gowns filled the evening wear department; within a few months, they were manufacturing a bridge line.
        But over the years, I have managed to hunt down some memorable bargains. I think of those pieces much as a golfer may think of a hole in one, or a hunter a conquered elk. They are trophies, foraged from the detritus of the store, wrestled with in the communal dressing room drenched in fluorescent light. There was the floor-length Carolina Herrera silk chiffon halter dress in navy, for which I paid, after using a number of discount coupons and my birthday discount, about $80. Of course, I had to buy it two sizes two large and paid about the same amount to have it altered. There was that pair of Marc Jacobs gold suede and leather pumps (worn only once, I'll admit), the tubs of Annick Goutal perfume, the Temple St. Clair ring. (At 40 percent off, plus 15 percent off, plus 30 percent off, it was almost free.)
        PERHAPS the store's most unintentionally famous features are the communal dressing rooms, fluorescent-lighted spaces the size of boxing rings, which, at least in my experience, can house up to 20 women at a time. This is why Loehmann's is for only the bravest of creatures, women unafraid to bare their fat rolls, dimpled thighs and other unappetizingly jiggly bits without shame. As a teenager years ago, this shocked me, but today it's kind of a relief to see up close and personal that no one is a supermodel.
        On this birthday, unlike most others, I was disappointed. In the past, I've noticed that stock turns over pretty quickly in December. This year was different. Finding only one thing I really had to have at the beginning of my birthday week (a Missoni sweater jacket, regular price $999, marked down to $349.99, minus $52.50 for birthday discount), I returned several days later, only to find the same winter duffel coats, the same lavender mukluks (soooooo Paris Hilton, November 2004) and the same white Valentino beaded shirt-collar dress, tethered by a security lanyard to its chrome display rack ($999, marked down from $3,000).
        More agitating was the fact that the store appears to have installed aggressive security tags. Now the leather coats and evening dresses in the fourth floor Back Room (which allegedly houses the best stuff in the store) let out a continual cacophony of whining sirens and beeps even as they hang on the racks. They bleated rhythmically like heart monitors, sounding out a thumpety-thumpety thumping song line, as if foretelling some future hospital-bed scenario.
        Suddenly I felt very old.
        Loehmann's  101 Seventh Avenue (near 16th Street); (212) 352-0856
        ATMOSPHERE Slightly cleaned-up rummage sale.  SERVICE Practically nonexistent in this survival-of-the-fittest retail utopia.  PRICES Sherry Cassin lynx vest with leather trim, $449, marked down from $1,985; Cynthia Steffe beaded chiffon and lace dress, $59.99,
        reduced from $305; Michael Kors black-and-white rickrack miniskirt, $239, formerly $679.
        Critical Shopper
      