
        Power crews drove trucks up from California. Equipment came in by rail from Kansas. Emergency workers caught flights from Quebec.
        But Bruce Smith, 57, a serviceman who has been working on power lines in the Pacific Northwest for 35 years, said he knew the aftermath of the severe windstorm that hit the region last week had been different when he saw Stephen P. Reynolds, the chief executive of Puget Sound Energy, drive down remote and mangled Kelly Road on Wednesday.
        ''He had never been out here before,'' Mr. Smith said, sitting in his work truck surrounded by fallen Douglas firs and a shredded electrical line. ''He said he couldn't believe it.''
        Nearly a week after hurricane-strength gusts, heavy rain in the lowlands and blizzard conditions at higher elevations left more than a million homes and businesses without power, more than 100,000 people remained without power on Wednesday. Many of them were in relatively remote areas like this one, about 25 miles east of Seattle at the foot of the snow-capped Cascade Range. They ran generators if they had them, bartered for firewood and worked hard at keeping expectations limited. Power companies have made it clear that those living in rural areas are likely to be the last served while repairs are made in more populated areas.
        At least 12 people have died in the Puget Sound region in the storm that hit Dec. 14 and 15 and in its aftermath. At least six of the deaths were from carbon monoxide poisoning.
        Many of those who have died or become sick have been non-native speakers of English. On Wednesday, The Seattle Times devoted the entire top half of its front page to warnings -- set in bold red ink and written in English, Chinese, Somali, Spanish, Russian and Vietnamese -- that urged people not to use gas or charcoal grills to cook indoors or to run generators inside.
        There have been scattered complaints about steep price increases on items like batteries and hotel rooms, and the state attorney general's office has warned people against unlicensed contractors who may demand payment up front to remove trees or repair roofs.
        But Doug Walsh, chief of the consumer protection division in the office of the state attorney general, Rob McKenna, said most problems stemmed from lack of power.
        ''There was never a shortage of gasoline,'' Mr. Walsh said, ''only a shortage of gas stations able to distribute it, because they didn't have power.''
        Emergency shelters are open in Seattle and its suburbs. Only about 5,000 customers remain without power in Seattle, less than 2 percent of the total, while about 100,000 in the major suburbs had no power as of Wednesday afternoon.
        In Duvall, seven evergreens fell on Hannah Ostrem's property but only two really mattered -- the ones that landed on the house.
        ''We're calling it a custom-dropped ceiling,'' said Ms. Ostrem, 37.
        Ms. Ostrem, her husband and their 17-year-old daughter are living on limited power from a generator, cooking on a wood stove and wondering when the insurance company will call back.
        Mr. Smith, the serviceman with Puget Sound Energy, said it could take 20 crews three days to repair major lines in Duvall, and he was less confident about side roads.
        ''If we get everybody up by Christmas, that would be good,'' he said as he prepared to lead a crew from California to start work.
        Asked if Mr. Reynolds, the chief executive, had said that timeframe was a priority, he said Mr. Reynolds had stopped short of an ultimatum.
        ''But when it comes to public relations,'' Mr. Smith said, ''they've got to get people's lights back up by Christmas.''
        Adding to the challenge, more foul weather was in the immediate forecast, including wind gusts over 40 miles per hour.
      