
        Gov. George E. Pataki has agreed not to fill some key vacancies at the state's public authorities, to address Governor-elect Eliot Spitzer's concerns that his hands would be tied for years by the outgoing governor's appointments, officials said yesterday.
        The deal came as lawmakers returned to Albany for a special legislative session today and a last round of Pataki-era deal making. The governor spoke to the Senate and Assembly leaders in separate telephone conversations yesterday, but the sides continue to negotiate over several issues, including a legislative pay raise, Mr. Pataki's proposal to establish procedures for civil confinement of sex offenders after their prison terms end, and the proposed Atlantic Yards project in Brooklyn.
        Mr. Pataki is also making scores of appointments for judgeships and for the boards of public authorities, but will leave several key jobs open, one of his aides said.
        One is a board seat on the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the aide said. But for a second vacancy, Mr. Pataki will nominate Norman Seabrook, a supporter who is president of the union representing New York City correction officers. Governor Pataki has also agreed not to fill a seat on the powerful Public Service Commission, which oversees utilities, and one on the Thruway Authority, but he will nominate Kevin J. Plunkett, the brother of his former law partner, and Virgil Conway, the former head of the M.T.A., for two other posts. The nominations are virtually certain to be approved by the Republican-controlled State Senate.
        Other posts Mr. Pataki agreed to leave vacant include the chairmanship of the Public Employment Relations Board, an agency that resolves contract disputes with state worker unions; the chairmanship of the State of New York Mortgage Agency; and seats on the Adirondack Park Agency, the Energy Research and Development Authority and the Urban Development Corporation, the aide said.
        Darren Dopp, a spokesman for Mr. Spitzer, said, ''They listened to our concerns and in a number of areas gave us the ability to do what we want to do.''
      