
        Lawmakers will face several major unresolved issues as they return here on Wednesday for a special session that will be the swan song of Gov. George E. Pataki's administration.
        Mr. Pataki is calling the Legislature back ostensibly to make a last-ditch effort at passing a law establishing legal procedures to allow for the civil confinement of sex offenders in mental institutions after their prison terms end.
        But there are several other major proposals on the table, including Mr. Pataki's attempt to increase the number of charter schools and the desire of many lawmakers to get a pay raise.
        Mr. Pataki is also continuing to stock the boards of public authorities, commissions and councils with his own appointees before he leaves office, and they require approval by the Republican-led Senate, where such appointments have not faced much resistance in the past. The governor would also like to act on a recent report by a state commission that recommended closing at least nine hospitals in the state and merging several others.
        ''There's a great deal still going on and a great deal I'm still fighting to achieve, and will until the last, Dec. 31,'' Mr. Pataki said on Monday, during the dedication of a new stretch of Hudson River Park.
        The Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, a Democrat, could normally be expected to resist his old nemesis, Mr. Pataki, on many of these issues, considering that another Democrat, Governor-elect Eliot Spitzer, is waiting to take office on Jan. 1.
        But Mr. Pataki has a potent trump card. Legislators have not had a pay increase in eight years, and Mr. Spitzer has said he does not support one. Mr. Pataki agreed to the last pay raise, in 1998, as part of a deal to get lawmakers to approve charter schools. Now he wants more charter schools, and some lawmakers are hoping for a repeat of their 1998 deal.
        ''The speaker has indicated publicly his support,'' Eileen Larrabee, a spokeswoman for Mr. Silver, said of the pay increases. ''He thinks members deserve one because they haven't had one for eight years.''
        Mr. Pataki appeared to leave the door open to the raise in remarks he made last week, saying of the issue, ''I've never drawn a line in the sand.''
        Among the proposals being floated by the Legislature would be a pay raise described as a one-time cost-of-living adjustment.
        Until Monday, there had been little in the way of substantive talks between the governor and the Legislature, in part because Mr. Silver has been traveling in Israel. But he was back on Monday and the sides were talking, though it was hard to tell if everything or nothing would get done, as is often the case in Albany.
        The issue of pay raises has been a controversial one. Last week, the Citizens Budget Commission, a business-backed fiscal monitoring group, said that lawmakers should address the state's mounting debt before raising their salaries.
        New York legislators have the third-highest level of base pay, $79,500, trailing only California and Michigan, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures. That pay is typically increased by stipends for leadership positions like committee chairmanships.
        As for civil confinement, Assembly Democrats have been under pressure to settle differences on the issue with Republicans. Jeanine F. Pirro, the Republican who lost a bid for attorney general, said last year, ''That's a difference between Democrats and Republicans -- we don't want them next door molesting children and murdering women.''
        The Assembly eventually passed a bill, but it differed from the Republican-led Senate's bill, and a public conference committee never ironed out the differences. Some Assembly Democrats have had qualms about confining people who have already served their sentences. This week some civil libertarians and psychiatrists opposed to the measure made arguments aimed largely at the undecided Assembly members.
        An analysis by the New York Civil Liberties Union found what it termed ''significant racial disparities'' among the sex offenders deemed to pose the greatest risk. Blacks make up 37.2 percent of those sex offenders, called level three sex offenders, the analysis found, while making up 15.9 percent of the state's population.
        Dr. Richard B. Krueger, an associate professor of clinical psychiatry at Columbia University and the vice president of the New York State chapter of the Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers, warned that the civil confinement legislation being considered has not been proved to be effective. He said that the state should consider lengthening prison sentences for sexual offenders and instituting lifetime parole or probation before sending them to costly beds in health care facilities after their sentences.
        ''It seems to me that there is a rush here,'' he said. ''Nobody really looked more broadly at ways to do this more efficiently.''
      