
        Paul Arizin, the Philadelphia Warriors' Hall of Fame forward of the 1950s and early '60s, and one of pro basketball's first jump-shot specialists, died Tuesday night at his home in suburban Philadelphia. He was 78.
        Arizin died in his sleep, said Villanova University, where he was an all-American.
        Arizin was only 6 feet 4 inches, but his great spring, making his jump shot nearly unstoppable, propelled him to N.B.A. scoring titles in 1952 and 1957. He led the Warriors to the N.B.A. championship in 1956, when they defeated the Fort Wayne Pistons in the finals.
        He was named one of the N.B.A.'s 50 greatest players in 1996, when the league celebrated its 50th anniversary.
        Playing 10 seasons for the Warriors (he missed two seasons while in the Marines), Arizin scored 16,266 points, an average of 22.8 points a game. He was the third player in N.B.A. history to score 15,000 points. He was an All-Star every season he played, and he was inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Mass., in 1978.
        Joe Fulks of the Warriors pioneered the jump shot in pro basketball in the late 1940s, when the pros were overshadowed by college basketball. Arizin gained wider renown for his jumper as the N.B.A. began to achieve popularity in the 1950s.
        When Arizin joined the Warriors in 1950, pro basketball was largely a plodding affair featuring set shots. The 24-second rule, which speeded up the game, was still four years away. But Arizin quickly provided some flash to the pro game.
        He had honed his jump shot playing in independent leagues when he was not good enough for a regular role on his high school team in his native Philadelphia.
        ''It came by accident,'' he was quoted by NBA.com as once saying. ''Some of our games were played on dance floors. It became quite slippery. When I tried to hook, my foot would go out from under me, so I jumped. I was always a good jumper. My feet weren't on the floor, so I didn't have to worry about slipping. The more I did it, the better I became. Before I knew it, practically all my shots were jump shots.''
        At Villanova, Arizin scored 20 points a game, and The Sporting News named him the college player of the year for 1949-50, when he propelled the Wildcats to a 25-4 record.
        A first-round draft pick of the Warriors, Arizin played alongside Fulks in the early 1950s, and later teamed with stars like Neil Johnston, Tom Gola, Wilt Chamberlain and Guy Rodgers. Arizin retired from Warriors before the 1962-63 season, when they moved to San Francisco, then played several seasons in the Eastern Basketball League. He was later a sales representative for I.B.M.
        Arizin is survived by his wife, Maureen; four sons; a daughter; and 14 grandchildren.
        In Arizin's day, N.B.A. players often held off-season jobs. Arizin worked for a time at a scrap-metal company.
        As he once told The Philadelphia Inquirer: ''You have to say one thing about my era: Players played for the love of the game rather than the money.''
      