
        Even above the din in Times Square, you can hear the chiming of hundreds of little bells. But the sound does not come from the stalwarts standing over Salvation Army kettles. The bells rest instead on the handlebars of pedicabs.
        The bells are just one way ambitious pedicab drivers search for fares; these days, some of them are also wearing fake reindeer antlers. But their mood is not necessarily festive. Although the city's pedicab industry is about a decade old, with an estimated 400 vehicles and perhaps more, local officials and cabdrivers, among others, are seeking to rein it in.
        ''They charge whatever they want, they do whatever they want, and it's completely below the radar,'' said City Councilman James Gennaro of Fresh Meadows, Queens, speaking on Monday at a Council hearing on pending legislation to regulate the industry.
        The bills would require seat belts and other safety measures in pedicabs, as well as insurance and driver's licenses for pedicab drivers. Some council members would do away with the vehicles altogether; Mr. Gennaro, for example, believes that pedicabs can never be made safe.
        Taxicab owners are also frustrated. The Metropolitan Taxicab Board of Trade, a taxi owner advocacy group, recently released a DVD called ''Exclusively Yellow? The Illegal Practices of Pedicabs, Liveries and Black Cars in New York City,'' showing pedicab drivers idling at stands designated for taxis and quoting fares higher than taxi rates. Joseph Giannetto, the group's director of business development, argued at the Council hearing that only taxi drivers are allowed to pick up what are known as ''street hails.''
        Some pedicab drivers, like Kuddusi Demir, an engineer who has driven a pedicab for 18 months, support regulation. ''It's good for us -- we want to be legal,'' he said on Tuesday evening as he looked for passengers outside the Marriott Marquis on West 45th Street. ''Right now, the cops bother us because they don't know who we are.''
        But the New York City Pedicab Owners Association, a trade group, objects to some of the proposed legislation. All the proposals would require pedicab drivers to hold driver's licenses, for instance, but the trade group believes that a learner's permit is sufficient. The group also opposes any cap on the number of pedicabs; some of the bills would allow city government to set a cap.
        Some pedicab drivers also say they are bothered by other for-hire drivers.
        ''On Sunday,'' said a driver named Gregory James Broderick as he pointed out a crack in the fender of his red pedicab, ''I was sideswiped by a livery cab driver, and he used rather choice four-letter adjectives. There definitely is a rogue element of cabdrivers who totally hate us. They see us as a threat.''
        Despite their troubles, neither Mr. Broderick nor Mr. Demir thinks that pedicabs will go away anytime soon. As if to prove the point, Mr. Broderick could be seen just moments later pedaling down 50th Street at a brisk five miles an hour, bundled-up tourists in tow staring avidly at the lights of the city.
        JEFF VANDAM
        NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: MIDTOWN
      