
        A Maryland congressman was named by incoming Speaker Nancy Pelosi on Tuesday to oversee the Democratic effort to retain the party's House majority in the 2008 elections.
        The congressman, Representative Chris Van Hollen, just elected to his third term representing the state's affluent Washington suburbs, will serve as chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, succeeding Representative Rahm Emanuel of Illinois.
        In a statement, Mrs. Pelosi said Mr. Van Hollen's ''depth of legislative experience and political savvy will make him an exceptional D.C.C.C. chairman.''
        Mr. Van Hollen, a former state legislator, was responsible for recruiting Democratic candidates in the midterm elections. He worked closely with Mr. Emanuel in developing and carrying out the strategy that helped Democrats gain 30 seats and oust the Republican majority after 12 years in power.
        As chairman, he will have to protect freshman Democrats in some Republican-leaning districts and try to unseat Republicans against the uncertain backdrop of a presidential race without an incumbent candidate.
        ''I want to build on the momentum from the last election,'' Mr. Van Hollen said, ''and I think the message was very clear. The most important thing we can do right out of the box is enact our agenda for change and show that Congress is operating differently.''
        Mr. Emanuel, who was elected the fourth-ranking House Democratic leader this year, said Mr. Van Hollen's personal experience winning a tough primary in 2002 and defeating a Republican incumbent had demonstrated ''an acute political capacity rarely found in Washington.''
        ''Throughout this election, I sought his advice and counsel in every critical decision I had to make,'' Mr. Emanuel said.
        Mr. Van Hollen's counterpart at the National Republican Congressional Committee will be Representative Tom Cole of Oklahoma. Mr. Cole, a former chief of staff at the Republican National Committee and onetime executive director of the Congressional committee, is also considered a sharp political strategist.
        Mrs. Pelosi of California also named three women to Democratic leadership posts under the speaker's control. Representative Juanita Millender-McDonald of California will head the Administration Committee, which oversees House operations. Representative Stephanie Tubbs Jones of Ohio, a former judge, will head the ethics committee. Representative Carolyn B. Maloney of New York will serve as vice chairwoman of the Joint Economic Committee.
        In addition, Mrs. Pelosi appointed Representative Xavier Becerra of California assistant to the speaker, giving Hispanic Democrats a representative in leadership. ''As former chair of the Hispanic caucus, he has proven himself a national leader on issues of importance to the Latino community,'' Mrs. Pelosi said, ''and his appointment to the new Democratic leadership will strengthen the voices of Latinos across the country.
      