
        THERE are days when Shannon Lanier, a producer at CBS Television, is too tired to have conversations with his doormen, all of whom are brimming with stories, none of which are brief. Sometimes, on his way up to his Bronx apartment, he dashes by them, pretending to be in a hurry. Occasionally he acts as if he's on his cellphone.
        ''You don't want to blow them off, because they're nice and helpful, but the last thing you want to do is stand there and have a conversation when you're so close to being home,'' he said. It's especially bad during this time of year. ''They're definitely extra chatty because they're trying to get that holiday tip,'' Mr. Lanier said.
        It's not just doormen looking to fill their stockings with extra cash who are talking up a storm. Year round, it almost seems part of the job description for certain people in the service business -- cabdrivers, massage therapists, barbers -- to share their ideas about everything from child rearing to religion, with little prompting.
        Customers, to avoid appearing impolite or inviting bad service, often find themselves listening to monologues that last for minutes -- minutes many say that they can't afford to lose, especially during the holidays when schedules are tight.
        Service providers don't have a lock on chattiness. (Who hasn't had a marathon conversation with Mother?) And in some jobs, like bikini waxing or dentistry, small talk is often welcome as a relief from the awkwardness of close quarters. But many people find it annoying to be cornered by a loquacious stranger, especially one whom they're paying.
        Lauren Booth, a legal recruiter in Manhattan, said that the barista at her Starbucks loves to yak away while whipping up peppermint mocha lattes and Guatemalan-blend coffees for his customers. He once told Ms. Booth a lengthy tale about his son finding his hidden Christmas presents early; he regularly gives her unsolicited advice about rearing her infant daughter; and he recently brought in pictures from his vacation and made her flip through the stack as he reminisced.
        Though she had to get to work, Ms. Booth felt compelled to listen. ''You can't be rude to him,'' she said. ''I drink only decaf and if I make him mad, he might give me caffeine and I'll be shaking all day.''
        According to Terry Williams, a sociology professor at the New School for Social Research who teaches a class called Consumption in the City: ''A lot of people are turned off by chatty people because they don't need to be convinced to buy an item. They're already there to buy it, so in a way it's redundant.''
        Lesley Devrouax, a swimsuit designer in Washington, remembers playing therapist to a brokenhearted bartender, just dumped by his girlfriend. ''He's giving me all the details about his breakup and then he starts crying like a baby,'' she said. ''He started asking my friend and me for advice about how to get her back. Like we had the answer?'' She listened attentively and did her best to console him, but all the while she was thinking: ''Can I get the check, please?''
        STEPHEN MILLER, the author of ''Conversation: A History of a Declining Art,'' said that the proliferation of devices like iPods and use of the Internet have encouraged insularity. Now that many on-the-go people would prefer to commune by text message, something as antiquated as face-to-face interaction with someone you don't know can be, well, irritating.
        ''You have a lot of people who are so caught up in their frantic lives and deadlines that they think that any form of extraneous conversation that can't be used to help them in some way is a waste of time,'' Mr. Miller said.
        Melissa Hobley, a publicist at Coburn Communication in Manhattan, said she has a high tolerance for talkative people, given that she is one herself. But she recently met her match in her new housekeeper, who likes to talk incessantly about everything from her own life to where Ms. Hobley shops. Even her housekeeper's notes are lengthy.
        ''She's sweet, so it wasn't offensive,'' Ms. Hobley said, ''but it felt like a tornado had just come in the room.''
        There is a school of thought that says people in different regions are more open to idle chitchat, and that suburbanites are more tolerant than city dwellers. In the South and Midwest, Mr. Miller said, ''The pace is somewhat slower and people want to appear friendly.''
        Cindy Barshop, owner of the Completely Bare salons in and around New York City, said that staff members at her branch in Scarsdale are encouraged to chat more. ''The women there want that,'' Ms. Barshop said. ''They like the conversation.'' At her three Manhattan locations, employees have been told to keep talk to a minimum. In her view, city women spend their days handling constant demands on their attention. They ''have busy schedules and they usually do not have time to talk,'' she said.
        But even those clients appreciate a few well-timed words. During intimate, painful procedures like a Brazilian bikini wax, chatting puts the client at ease and is a welcome distraction, Ms. Barshop said.
        At Haven, a spa in SoHo known for its quiet, massage therapists go through an audition -- massaging one of the spa's employees -- before being hired. Those that are motormouths usually don't make the cut, said Brenna Dubs, Haven's spa director.
        ''Checking in every once in awhile during a massage is a good thing because you want to stay connected to the client,'' she said. ''But if you do too much of that, it can be hard for the client to focus on what their body is feeling. They have to be able to disengage.''
        But in some businesses, says Professor Williams, chatting can actually help sales.
        Paul Labrecque, owner of three hair salons under his name, has found that gabbing has only increased his business over the years. ''The extroverted hairdressers tend to build the biggest clientele,'' said Mr. Labrecque, who encourages his more reticent employees to speak up. ''It's important to make people feel like they're your friend. You develop a relationship with them, and they become faithful.''
        Given his affability, a number of clients are comfortable sharing private details of their lives with him. Infidelity, divorce, dating, breast cancer -- he's discussed it all and more over highlights and blow-outs.
        Still, he has his rules. No gossiping and no disparaging other clients, he said. And he discusses only the positive things happening in his life. ''I pay my therapist to hear the bad things,'' he said. ''My clients don't pay to hear my drama.''
        Experts say there are ways to quiet down chatterboxes. When dealing with a talkative salesclerk, Charlotte Ford, the author of ''21st- Century Etiquette,'' suggests looking at your watch and declaring: ''Oh goodness, I have an appointment in 10 minutes. Thank you for your help.''
        Peter Post, a director of the Emily Post Institute, said that he suggests a more direct approach, such as, ''I really appreciate you wanting to have a conversation, but right now I'd like to chill out a little bit.''
        Ms. Dubs has another way to silence talky masseuses. Respond by saying, ''If you can hold your suggestions to the end, I'd appreciate that,'' she said. Pretending to be asleep works, too.
      