
        The Detroit Pistons had two crucial defensive stops in the final two minutes against the Nets on Saturday night, showing the sort of championship resolve that the Nets can only dream of in their sluggish start to the season.
        Those plays helped the Pistons finish off a 90-82 victory against the Nets, who bare little resemblance to the elite team they hoped to be.
        With only one victory against a team with a winning record before Saturday, the Nets (9-14) had an opportunity to do their psyche some good. Instead, their offense could not crack the Pistons' grit in the fourth quarter and the Nets, losers of two games in a row, were again left to wonder how they can turn their season around.
        ''Obviously, we are disappointed with where we're at,'' Nets Coach Lawrence Frank said. ''We know we have to get better. You can't get caught up in 9-14. All you can get caught up in is getting better.''
        Nets guard Jason Kidd said his team was not losing hope.
        ''You wish it would turn around overnight, but it doesn't work that way,'' he said. ''We got to keep fighting, and everybody has to continue to do their job.''
        Many people may doubt the Pistons' defensive abilities without Ben Wallace, who was lost through free agency to the Chicago Bulls in the off-season. But Detroit (14-8) is one of only five Eastern Conference teams with a winning record, and in the final two minutes Saturday, the Pistons proved their defense was still good enough to put games away.
        With the score tied at 82-82, Pistons guard Chauncey Billups stole the ball from Richard Jefferson, setting up a jumper by Richard Hamilton.
        A short time later, Pistons forward Tayshaun Prince blocked a jump shot by Kidd, and the Nets' Vince Carter came away with the ball. As he drove to the basket, Billups stripped it from him and converted a fast-break layup to put the Pistons ahead, 88-82, with 50.4 seconds to play.
        Billups scored 27 points and had 11 assists. Hamilton had 26 points.
        ''They made plays in the last two minutes of a tied ballgame, and we didn't,'' said Jefferson, who finished with 11 points after scoring 9 in the first quarter. ''That was really the difference.''
        Until Billups's steal, the Nets had hung in the game with some good defense of their own. One of their best defensive stands came with a little less than five minutes to play when they forced a 24-second violation. Later, Kidd made a 3-pointer from the top of the arc to tie the score at 82-82 with about two and a half minutes to play. But it was the Nets' last challenge.
        Nenad Krstic led the Nets with 27 points. But Carter, the team's leading scorer for the season, had only 12 points for the second consecutive game. And the Nets have lost them both.
        ''I'll be O.K.,'' Carter said.
        The Nets had a difficult time finishing inside, in part because of the Pistons' frontcourt. Jason Maxiell especially gave Detroit a lift in the second half with 6 points, 4 rebounds and 2 blocked shots. In all, the Pistons had eight blocked shots.
        Billups applauded the play of his frontcourt, which was without its best player, Rasheed Wallace. He sat out because of sore ankles.
        ''They blocked everything that was coming in there,'' Billups said. ''And what they didn't get, they were looking for. That's how you win; you have guys patrolling the paint area.''
        The Nets said the referees did not give them the calls that they gave the Pistons. Detroit shot 12 free throws in the fourth quarter, the Nets none. The Nets were upset in the fourth quarter when Dale Davis appeared to throw Krstic to the floor but was not called for a flagrant foul.
        ''Calls didn't go certain ways towards the end,'' said Mikki Moore, who provided the Nets a spark off the bench with 6 points and 5 rebounds. ''That's the difference in the game.''
        Jefferson, who missed the game Friday night against the Toronto Raptors because of a sore right ankle, said he felt better Saturday night. He said his 2 points in the final three quarters of the game had nothing to do with how his ankle felt.
        Jefferson did acknowledge before the game Saturday night that he might have to cope with ankle pain for the entire season.
        PRO BASKETBALL
      