
        SUFFOLK COUNTY is pressing for quick federal approval of a county-financed $4.7 million emergency project to combat erosion at Smith Point County Park, a heavily used oceanfront park and the site of the TWA Flight 800 memorial.
        The memorial commemorates the 230 passengers who died on July 17, 1996, when the jet exploded and fell into the Atlantic Ocean. It is next to the park pavilion, one area where beaches are eroded.
        County Executive Steve Levy said that the park would be in jeopardy unless federal permits were issued soon to allow dredging of 225,000 cubic yards of offshore sand to replenish beaches and rebuild a damaged dune line. ''A nor'easter would wipe out a good part of it and cripple our summer season,'' he said.
        Mr. Levy said the monument -- built on two acres donated by the county, with funds raised by the victims' families -- was secure. ''We think the monument is in pretty good shape. We're not as confident regarding the beachfront,'' he said.
        Smith Point is on the east end of the Fire Island barrier island within the Fire Island National Seashore. The National Park Service has jurisdiction over beach projects within seashore boundaries and would have to approve the project, as would the Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and state agencies.
        Michael T. Reynolds, the seashore superintendent, said that the county permit request was under review and that ''I do want to resolve this in cooperation with the county.''
        Ronald F. Foley, commissioner of the Suffolk Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation, said the county wanted work to begin in early January. He said it had to be completed by April because of environmental regulations.
        Mr. Foley said the project would repair two eroded areas near the Moriches Inlet and rebuild dunes crucial to protecting against wash-overs. He said sand would also be placed on an eroded part of the main beach, including a section in front of the pavilion. ''Any work we do there enhances protection of the monument,'' he said.
        A seawall covered by sand also protects the memorial, which includes a granite wall listing the victims.
        John Seaman of Clifton Park, N.Y., a board member of the Families of TWA Flight 800 Association, said the group, whose members are victims' survivors, supported the project. ''We recognize that the ultimate protection for the memorial is the preservation of the beach,'' he said.
        Mr. Seaman, whose 19-year-old niece died in the crash, said the association originally sought to place the monument farther from the water. He said the county stipulated the site near the pavilion and said it was safe from erosion.
        But Mr. Seaman said the county told the group in 2002, after the memorial was in place, that erosion threatened the location. He said the county and other government agencies then agreed on the seawall and other protections.
        UPDATE
      