
        The World Trade Center Memorial Foundation abandoned a longstanding plan yesterday to list victims' names in purely random fashion around the twin pools of the 9/11 memorial -- a plan that had angered family members and firefighters -- in favor of a more ordered arrangement.
        The new plan was endorsed by Stephen J. Cassidy, the president of the Uniformed Firefighters Association, but was criticized by Edith Lutnick, the executive director of the Cantor Fitzgerald Relief Fund. Cantor suffered the greatest death toll: 658 employees, including Ms. Lutnick's brother Gary.
        Under the new plan, firefighters and police officers would be grouped by command or precinct or company -- but not by rank -- in a ribbon of names on a parapet overlooking the south pool.
        Also around the south pool would be the names of those who died in the south tower; aboard United Airlines Flight 175, which hit the tower; and on the flights that crashed in Pennsylvania and at the Pentagon. The six people who died in the Feb. 26, 1993, trade center bombing would be listed there, as would those whose exact location on 9/11 is unknown.
        Around the north pool would be the names of those who died in the north tower and those who were aboard American Airlines Flight 11, which crashed into the tower.
        Employees could be grouped together but there would be no indication of the company's identity on the parapet. An unknowing visitor, therefore, would still perceive the names as random, while those who knew a given victim would recognize that the surrounding names were those of co-workers.
        Spouses, siblings and other relatives could also be listed together. Ages, however, would not be given next to the names, nor would the tower floors be specified.
        The plan was adopted by the foundation's executive committee after a presentation by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, who is also the foundation chairman.
        ''There is no 'right' answer,'' Mr. Bloomberg said in a statement. ''Nevertheless, it is time to move forward. I believe the solution we present today strikes the right balance, and although I don't expect everyone to be happy with it, I can assure everyone that their views were heard as we struggled with this question.''
        Michael Arad, who won the memorial design competition with a proposal to arrange the names in a way that would create ''meaningful adjacencies,'' said that the new plan represented a ''very positive direction.''
        Mr. Cassidy agreed. ''It's fitting,'' he said, ''that those who perished that day be listed together with their brothers who they went into battle with.''
        But Ms. Lutnick said that that was one of the flaws of the new plan: that civilians -- unlike uniformed personnel -- would not be listed explicitly by affiliation. ''You'll know from this memorial who died at the Pentagon, who died on Flight 175 and who was a firefighter,'' she said. ''Why do civilians not deserve the same respect and remembrance?''
        She said the plan -- ''almost a unilateral action'' by Mayor Bloomberg -- failed to take into account what people always asked about a victim: ''What was his age? Where did he work? What floor was he on?''
      