
        The British police interviewed Prime Minister Tony Blair on Thursday as a witness in a scandal over accusations that high honors were traded for political contributions. The idea of the police questioning a prime minister struck British journalists as virtually unheard of.
        A spokesman for Mr. Blair said that the interview, lasting almost two hours, was not conducted under what is called police caution, meaning that he was seen as a witness and not a suspect.
        But with Mr. Blair serving his final months after promising to step down, and with his ratings savaged and his legacy threatened by the war in Iraq, the episode at 10 Downing Street added another damaging burden for a leader who took office in 1997 promising a spotless political order.
        ''It is yet one more straw on the back of a rather struggling camel,'' said Rodney Barker, a professor of government at the London School of Economics.
        Mr. Blair was the latest in a series of ever-higher-ranking officials to be questioned by the police about accusations that his Labor Party offered to grant prestigious peerages, seats in the House of Lords, to donors who made long-term loans and other contributions worth $27 million to the party coffers before the 2005 national elections.
        The inquiry was begun after complaints by Angus MacNeil, a legislator from the opposition Scottish National Party, who said Thursday: ''This revelation will be shaking the very foundations of Westminster. For the prime minister to be questioned by the police during a criminal investigation is unprecedented.''
        The scandal emerged as Mr. Blair fought to regain credibility lost in his handling of the Iraq war and as he fought a stubborn campaign by a rival, Gordon Brown, the chancellor of the Exchequer, to take his place.
        Indeed, said Prof. John Curtice, a political scientist at the University of Strathclyde in Glasgow, the police inquiry, unfolding since March, was ''one of the series of events that ensured the Blair regime did not last as long as he intended.''
        But ''it does depend on how this story ends up,'' Professor Curtice said in a telephone interview.
        ''There are two ways of looking at this,'' he said. ''At least he was only interviewed as a witness, not under caution. The bad news is that it puts the story back into the headlines for a day or two.''
        ''The political point is known,'' he added. ''Tony Blair at a minimum acquiesced in a decision to raise money that cut across the spirit of a measure he had introduced himself,'' Professor Curtice said, referring to legislation to prevent corruption.
        British prime ministers are entitled to nominate commoners to receive peerages, knighthoods and other honors for various reasons, including service to their political party. But the practice of offering such favors in return for money was outlawed in 1925 after Prime Minister David Lloyd George had become notorious for the sale of honors to raise money for his Liberal Party.
        In the police interview on Thursday, ''The prime minister explained why he nominated each of the individuals, and he did so as party leader in respect of the peerages reserved for party supporters as other party leaders do,'' his spokesman said. ''The honors were not, therefore, for public service but expressly party peerages given for party service.
        ''In these circumstances, the fact that they had supported the party financially could not conceivably be a barrier to their nomination,'' the spokesman said.
        Mr. Blair offered no comment as he left his 10 Downing Street office for a European summit meeting in Brussels with reporters' questions ringing in his ears: ''What did you tell the police?'' and ''Did you convince the police you were innocent?''
        The former leader of the Conservative Party, Michael Howard, was interviewed by the police in October on the same issue.
        British political rules permit parties to use borrowed money -- rather than donations -- without declaring it publicly.
        Mr. Blair nominated four of those who had lent money for peerages, which were later delayed by an independent panel vetting such recommendations as the clamor for an inquiry grew. The panel -- the House of Lords Appointments Commission -- had been established by Mr. Blair in his effort to clean up politics after the so-called sleaze of his Conservative predecessors.
        Mr. Blair has said publicly that he knew about the loans, but has denied that the peerages were offered in return for them.
      