
        Police officers yesterday fatally shot a 62-year-old man, whom neighbors described as mentally ill, after the man threatened them with an ax on a sixth-floor fire escape outside his Bronx apartment, the authorities said. It was the third fatal police shooting of a civilian in the city during the past three weeks.
        Neighbors said the man, whom they identified as Anatoly Dmitriev, would wander around the Pelham Parkway section without shirt or shoes, even in cold weather.
        ''He would come out running in the winter in no shoes and shorts,'' said one neighbor, who said she had known Mr. Dmitriev for many years. ''Kids would spit on him and do things. They would harass him. He never reacted. That's why when we heard he was the one with the ax we were shocked.''
        But the police said officers responded to six 911 calls from the apartment Mr. Dmitriev shared with his 41-year-old son. Police did not disclose the nature of those calls or say when they had occurred.
        Neighbors said Mr. Dmitriev's wife died several years ago.
        ''He never talked to anybody,'' said Ben Gonzalez, 48, a neighbor. ''All he did was jog.''
        The shooting occurred in a six-story red brick co-op apartment building called Brady Court in a usually quiet middle-class neighborhood not far from the Bronx Zoo. The building's courtyard was decorated with a plastic snowman and a plastic Christmas tree festooned with lights.
        Officers responded to the building about 5:40 p.m. yesterday after receiving 911 calls about a man armed with an ax in the courtyard. Residents said Mr. Dmitriev appeared to have been trying to chop down a tree.
        By the time the police arrived, Mr. Dmitriev had gone back inside his apartment. When officers entered the apartment, Mr. Dmitriev climbed out a window onto the fire escape, wielding the ax, the police said.
        As Mr. Dmitriev started to climb down the fire escape, other officers were climbing up toward him, the authorities said. After Mr. Dmitriev threatened them with the ax, the police said, an officer fired two shots, both of which struck Mr. Dmitriev.
        It was unclear whether the officer who fired the shots was in Mr. Dmitriev's apartment or on the fire escape.
        Mr. Dmitriev was taken to Jacobi Medical Center, where he was pronounced dead.
      