
        As drama, what happened on stage at the Black Repertory Theater of Berkeley early Wednesday morning was not classic theatrical fare. The actors were mostly motionless, the play had only one line, and everyone in the audience knew how the story was going to end.
        But creating a compelling narrative may not have been the authors' point. The play was a re-enactment of the execution of the convicted killer Stanley Tookie Williams, staged on the first anniversary of his death by lethal injection at San Quentin State Prison.
        The performance was written and produced by Barbara Becnel and Shirley Neal, two friends of Mr. Williams and death penalty opponents, who were unapologetic about their play's being agitprop.
        ''This is political theater in the extreme,'' Ms. Becnel told a crowd of about 150 people who gathered to watch the performance. ''But it's political theater in the extreme because we need it.''
        The execution of Mr. Williams, 51, a founder of the Crips gang who was convicted of murdering four people in 1979, has continued to be a rallying point for death penalty opponents as well as a source of contention about the methods of lethal injection.
        In September, a representative of the state attorney general's office acknowledged that prison guards and nurses had botched Mr. Williams's lethal injection, failing to hook up a backup intravenous line to his arm. Ms. Becnel said Mr. Williams was in agony during his execution, which took 35 minutes to complete.
        ''I was there, I saw what they did,'' Ms. Becnel said. ''And I can tell you it was a 35-minute torture-murder.''
        State officials deny that Mr. Williams suffered unnecessarily. ''The execution went exactly as the protocol is designed to carry it out,'' said Nathan Barankin, a spokesman for Attorney General Bill Lockyer. ''The lack of the extra IV line was definitely a mistake, but it didn't affect the execution.''
        Michael Rushford, president of the Criminal Justice Legal Foundation, an advocate for victims' rights and law enforcement, said he believed Mr. Williams was a bad role model for a play.
        ''I think it hurts the anti-death-penalty movement to hold up as dastardly a criminal as Tookie,'' Mr. Rushford said, citing Mr. Williams's work with the Crips, a violent gang based in Los Angeles.
        Mr. Rushford added that Wednesday morning's performance was simply ''preaching to the choir'' of Mr. Williams's supporters, many of whom rallied in front of San Quentin the night of his execution.
        ''I don't expect an accurate portrayal of what happened,'' he said. ''But when you've made such a big deal of it, you can't just let it drop after a year.''
        Mr. Williams's experiences in the death chamber were part of a Federal District Court hearing in September -- stemming from a lawsuit by Michael Morales, a condemned rapist and killer -- that may affect death penalty methodology in California. The judge overseeing the hearings, Jeremy Fogel, effectively halted executions in California until he could hear arguments on whether methods of lethal injection caused undue pain. Judge Fogel is expected to issue a ruling soon.
        For supporters of Mr. Williams, his execution, which drew international press attention and a cadre of celebrity protesters, was unjust, in part because of his post-incarceration work speaking about the dangers of gangs through a series of children's books, lectures and memoirs, many of which were written with Ms. Becnel. Mr. Williams also claimed to be innocent.
        On Wednesday, the theatrical re-enactment began at 12:01 a.m., the time Mr. Williams entered the death chamber. It was performed by six actors, including Darby Tillis, 64, an exonerated death row inmate from Chicago who played Mr. Williams and said he had little trouble connecting with the role.
        ''When you're on death row, you always have an imaginary scene that you live out many times: how you would feel if you went down for an execution,'' Mr. Tillis said.
        With a simple set -- folding chairs, a gurney and a platform -- the play's action was minimal: three witnesses stood, a guard strapped Mr. Tillis to a gurney, a nurse fumbled with an IV. Only once did anyone speak, when Mr. Tillis asked the actor playing the frustrated nurse whether she knew what she was doing. The entire performance took about 12 minutes -- about a third of the actual execution time.
        And while the audience was silent throughout, some said the experience had left them shaken. Kirya Traber, 22, who wore a Save Tookie T-shirt, said she had been outside San Quentin the year before, but felt a lot closer to the drama on Wednesday.
        ''Here tonight,'' Ms. Traber said, ''was a lot more solemn.''
      