
        A chauffeur for Yoko Ono was arrested yesterday and accused of threatening to circulate private audiotapes and photographs and to kill her and her son, Sean, whose father was John Lennon, if she did not give him $2 million, the police said.
        The man, Koral Karsan, 50, who worked for Ms. Ono for 10 years, was arrested at his home in Amityville on Long Island, said Paul J. Browne, chief spokesman for the New York Police Department. Mr. Karsan is charged with attempted grand larceny, which carries a maximum sentence of 25 years in prison.
        As he was led from the 20th Precinct station house on West 82nd Street last night, Mr. Karsan said that Ms. Ono, 73, had invented the charges ''to stop a sexual harassment suit.'' He said she had sexually harassed him many times, and he vowed that ''there will be a sexual harassment case,'' before being driven away in a police car. Ms. Ono's spokesman called the harassment allegation ''completely false.''
        In a confrontation with Ms. Ono at her apartment in the Dakota on Friday, a law enforcement official said, Mr. Karsan presented her with a letter detailing his grievances. With the letter was a photograph of her in a housedress or pajamas and a tape of her expressing ''her personal opinions on people and events,'' the official said.
        Mr. Karsan tried to grab the material back, but Ms. Ono held onto it, the official said.
        It was unclear what other material Mr. Karsan had, or exactly what Ms. Ono said on the audio tape, but the official said none of it was sexual. ''It does not involve any sexually explicit anything,'' he said.
        On Tuesday, Mr. Karsan met with a lawyer for Ms. Ono, demanded $2 million and threatened to kill her, Sean Lennon, and himself if his demands were not met, the official said. The bizarre episode is the latest conflict between Ms. Ono and various family employees and confidants. Mr. Lennon's former personal assistant Frederic Seaman served five years' probation for stealing family photographs and Lennon documents.
        The confrontation at Ms. Ono's apartment happened on the 26th anniversary of Lennon's killing, but officials said the timing could have been coincidence.
        Ms. Ono's longtime spokesman, Elliot Mintz, said there had been no warning signs that Mr. Karsan was upset with his employer. ''It's such an act of betrayal that it has left her shocked,'' he said. As for Mr. Karsan's harassment claim, Mr. Mintz said, ''That is completely false, and the only victim here is Yoko Ono.''
        People who know Mr. Karsan, a dapper, white-haired man, expressed bafflement yesterday at the accusations against him. At the garage on West 72nd Street that Mr. Karsan used, one attendant, Kenneth Baldi, called Mr. Karsan ''an incredibly kind person.''
        ''That guy would guard that woman with his life,'' Mr. Baldi said.
        The law enforcement official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said Mr. Karsan went to the Dakota and handed Ms. Ono a letter detailing how he had been mistreated as an employee and telling her he had embarrassing material about her.
        ''He does say that he has information that she'd rather not see out there,'' said the official, who was briefed by investigators. ''That he has a recording of these personal conversations she is having and he will make them public.''
        Mr. Karsan tried to take the letter back and the two tussled, the official said. Ms. Ono was not injured.
        Ms. Ono fired Mr. Karsan and went to the police, who helped set up and monitor the meeting between her lawyer and Mr. Karsan on Tuesday at which Mr. Karsan demanded the $2 million, the official said.
        ''At one point,'' the official added, ''he just makes these threats that if she does not comply and if she goes to the police, that he will kill her, Sean and himself.''
        Mr. Karsan, who was arrested without incident, has no arrest record in New York, the police said.
        Mr. Karsan and his wife emigrated from Turkey about 15 years ago and within several years bought the modest, two-story Cape house they still occupy on Sterling Place in Amityville. The family is cordial but private, several neighbors said. They said he often worked on his house, and that his son, 26, lives with him.
        Neighbors said they knew that Mr. Karsan was a chauffeur who often drove a black luxury sedan to and from Manhattan each day. Most neighbors interviewed said they did not know for whom he worked, but two real estate brokers who work out of a house next door said they did.
        ''He wouldn't say much about Yoko, very close-mouthed about her, never said anything detrimental,'' said Gertrude M. Follett, one of the brokers. ''He loved his job and we always assumed she was happy with him. He was a charming man, always impeccably dressed. We never would have thought he would do what they're saying.''
        ''Total shock,'' said the other broker, Dolores Fox. ''Total shock. I hope it's not true.''
        Elys Collado, 25, another neighbor, said that Mr. Karsan had rarely spoken to her since she moved in three years ago, but that he was friendly.
        ''He recently carried in my new TV set for me, but even then he barely said anything,'' she said. ''Yoko Ono, that's a good job to have. Why would he do anything to mess it up?''
      