
        A construction worker charged in the death of an actress in the West Village gave the police an account of the woman's final moments, describing how he punched her and then hanged her from a shower curtain rod the way he had tied pigs on a farm in Ecuador, according to police notes released yesterday.
        The construction worker, Diego Pillco, 19, hanged the actress, Adrienne Shelly, because he was afraid he had accidentally killed her and wanted it to look like a suicide, according to notes taken by two detectives. They questioned him at a police station in the West Village about 3 a.m. on Nov. 6, five days after her body was discovered.
        He tied her up, the police quoted him as saying, the way he used ''to tie pigs in farm.''
        Mr. Pillco said he punched Ms. Shelly after she complained that he was making too much noise in an apartment below hers, where he was breaking a wall to install pipes, according to the statement.
        The notes of what appears to be a rambling and sometimes shifting account of events were released yesterday as Mr. Pillco pleaded not guilty to an indictment of second-degree murder in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
        Although the police characterized the notes as a confession, Mr. Pillco did not sign any of the documents. It was not clear whether the choppy language in the notes was a kind of police shorthand, a transcription of the suspect's poor English, or a result of translating his statement from Spanish to English.
        The police statement says Mr. Pillco also made a videotaped confession, which was taken by an assistant district attorney in Manhattan.
        At first, while talking to the detectives, Mr. Pillco denied killing Ms. Shelly, 40, an actress in independent films and a mother. He said he woke up in a bad mood on Nov. 1, the day Ms. Shelly was killed, and reported to his job site at 15 Abingdon Square in the West Village at 8 a.m.
        He said that about 10 a.m. he told two other construction workers that he was going to take their lunches down to the basement and put them on the boiler to warm them up. He said he went to the store to buy medicine for his stomach, then was called to another job in Midtown Manhattan. When he returned, he said, he heard that a woman had killed herself in the building.
        After further questioning, however, Mr. Pillco said that he had played a role in the woman's death, according to the police.
        He said that he was working in apartment No. 37 when he heard the door open and saw Ms. Shelly come in. He recognized her because she had complained about noise before.
        In one version he gave of what happened next, he said Ms. Shelly cursed him. In another, he said she was polite, but because he was in a bad mood, he slammed the door on her, hurting her. She opened the door and slapped him, he said.
        Mr. Pillco, an illegal immigrant, said that he was afraid that Ms. Shelly would call the police, and that he would be deported, so he followed her to her apartment, No. 47, which she used as an office.
        Inside the apartment, Mr. Pillco said, he kicked Ms. Shelly's purse across the floor as the argument intensified. ''I punched her in the eye,'' he told the police. ''She came towards me and tried to grab my shirt. She scratched me on my nose. I pushed her.''
        Ms. Shelly hit her head on a computer table and fell to the floor with her eyes open, Mr. Pillco told the police. He put his ear to her chest but could not hear a heartbeat, he said. He closed her eyes, took a sheet from the bed, tied it around her neck and dragged her down the hallway to the bathroom, according to the statement.
        He said he got the idea of making her death look like a suicide from a Spanish novella, according to the notes, but he could not remember its title.
        After describing how he hanged her from the shower curtain rod, he said: ''Always ties like that. Use to tie pigs in farm. She was not moving.''
        The city medical examiner, however, found that Ms. Shelly was still alive when she was hanged and died of ''compression of the neck.''
        Mr. Pillco told the police that he arrived in New York City on July 9, 2005, after a 20-day trip from Ecuador by way of Mexico.
      