
        Nobody knows for sure how or when the wild green parrots showed up in central Brooklyn, though most accounts have them escaping from a shipping crate at Kennedy Airport in the 1960s, or even earlier, and making themselves at home. That mystery, though, is an old one. What has been worrying residents lately is where all the parrots are going.
        Last summer, people in some areas where the parrots had lived started noticing empty nests, along with an absence of the parrots' signature squawk. By fall, a parrot aficionado from Bay Ridge named Steve Baldwin was highlighting the situation on his Web site, BrooklynParrots.com. Some residents raised the specter of poaching, reporting sightings of men with long nets climbing utility poles toward the birds' nests.
        Borough President Marty Markowitz himself, the owner of a domesticated parrot, was quoted calling the poaching ''reprehensible.''
        Then the trail went cold. ''No one really knows what happened to them,'' Mr. Baldwin said last week, ''except that they're gone, and it's questionable whether they will be coming back.''
        Plenty of parrots remain, he said, in their traditional homes of Brooklyn College and Green-Wood Cemetery and in scattered other locations. But many nests on poles throughout the neighborhoods of Marine Park and Midwood are empty, as Robert Nadel, a civic leader in the area, demonstrated on an impromptu parrot tour last week. The sidewalks under the nests are missing the little piles of discarded sticks that would, he said, be present if there were parrots at home.
        Mr. Nadel said that he could tell that another nest, a thicket of sticks wedged between power lines at the top of a pole on Avenue I in Midwood, was empty. If the parrots were there, he explained, ''you would hear it.'' As it was, the sound of traffic on Nostrand Avenue roared on uninterrupted.
        Mr. Baldwin, meanwhile, has stopped updating his site's map of parrot nest locations, to avoid tipping off poachers. If, that is, poachers are the reason for the depopulation. Parrots can be unpredictable, he said, and sometimes they simply leave on their own.
        ''A few turned up in Manhattan recently,'' Mr. Baldwin said. ''I have no idea where they came from.''
        JAKE MOONEY
        NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: BROOKLYN UP CLOSE
      