
        Giants defensive end Michael Strahan completed a full practice Wednesday for the first time since spraining his foot Nov. 5, and the team expects him to play Sunday against the New Orleans Saints.
        The Giants (7-7) have lost five of their past six games -- all without Strahan -- and are teetering at the bottom edge of the playoff picture. They hope Strahan can provide a quick jolt of whatever it is that they have been missing lately.
        ''Players do respond around Michael and the quality of his play,'' Coach Tom Coughlin said before practice. ''And also his ability just to put it right on the money when a circumstance comes up that is one of the four or five plays of the game that have to be made. He has that rare ability to make sure everyone understands that.''
        After practice, which is closed to the news media, Coughlin said Strahan performed in all of the drills.
        ''He did not look tentative or cautious,'' Coughlin said in a statement released by the team. ''He moved up and down the line in nine-on-seven with no problem. Now we'll see how he feels tomorrow.''
        Strahan has 132 1/2 sacks in his 14-year N.F.L. career. He is tied with the Hall of Fame linebacker Lawrence Taylor for the most sacks in Giants history, but the league did not recognize the statistic until 1982, a year after Taylor's rookie season, when he had nine and a half sacks.
        If Strahan returns, it will be just in time to face the Saints (9-5), the league's top passing team. Quarterback Drew Brees has been sacked only 17 times.
        The Giants are looking to put more pressure on the quarterback, but they expect Strahan's return to bolster the team's psyche, if not its sack totals.
        In games without Strahan since 2004, the Giants are 2-12. Most of that stems from 2004, when Strahan missed the final eight games with a torn pectoral muscle. His absence coincided with Coughlin's decision to insert quarterback Eli Manning into the starting lineup as a rookie, and the Giants lost seven of their last eight games.
        This season, Strahan was hurt in the second quarter of a victory against Houston. The Giants lost the next four games, beat the Carolina Panthers, then lost Sunday to the Philadelphia Eagles. Their ranking among the 32 N.F.L. defenses, in yards allowed, has slipped to 20th from 14th in his absence.
        On Monday, Coughlin said the team's struggles without Strahan were more than a coincidence.
        ''I think there's a definite connection,'' he said. ''I think it relates to two areas: one is his leadership and, obviously, two is his playing ability.''
        He added, ''When that's missing, that's an element of stability, if you will, of outstanding play, of leadership that is not on the field.''
        Strahan has not spoken to reporters for the past couple of weeks. His only public comments have been as a paid weekly guest on a radio show. He said on the show Monday that he was ''50-50'' to play against the Saints and said he wanted to play against the Eagles, but the Giants opted against it.
        EXTRA POINTS
        Tom Coughlin is not saying who will return kickoffs for the Giants, now that Derrick Ward has been placed on injured reserve, but the safe bet would be on Chad Morton. Ward had foot surgery in August and missed the first six games, then took over the kickoff-return job from Morton. Ward averaged 20.3 yards on 23 returns; Morton had averaged 21.7 yards on 29 returns, and he remains the team's punt returner. Another option could be the rookie receiver Sinorice Moss. Ward said his foot never healed properly. ''I think I might have come back too early,'' he said.  Centers Shaun O'Hara (ankle) and Rich Seubert (shin) were among those who did not practice Wednesday. If neither can play, Grey Ruegamer is likely to start.  Running back Brandon Jacobs (ankle) is listed as questionable, but he said: ''I'm not questionable. I'm playing.''
        PRO FOOTBALL
      