
        Another work shift was over, and the three colleagues had changed out of their uniforms and into street clothes. It had been a long, fruitless day, and Chad Pennington, Patrick Ramsey and Kellen Clemens needed to unwind before heading home.
        The three, all quarterbacks for the Jets, pulled up folding chairs in the locker room at Giants Stadium on Sunday night and sat in a semicircle facing their cubicles, their backs turned to the player interviews being conducted only yards away. All around them, people were packing up gear or shouting out questions. In the quarterbacks' pocket, all was calm.
        As their teammates rehashed the Jets' 31-13 loss to the Buffalo Bills for reporters, Pennington, Ramsey and Clemens broke down the game among themselves. Pennington sat in the middle. They were hunched over like Boy Scouts in front of a campfire.
        Pennington does not speak with reporters on Mondays, but Ramsey was in the locker room the day after the loss to the Bills, and he provided details of the quarterbacks' meeting.
        ''You've kind of got to get out of that mode of the game,'' Ramsey said Monday. ''Sit and relax and gather your thoughts. Just try to evaluate it while it's fresh in your mind. I think it gives you an idea where to start when you start evaluating film.''
        The quarterbacks went over the plays by memory, like golfers going over every hole of a competitive round.
        After playing effectively against the Houston Texans and the Green Bay Packers, the Jets' offense was out of sync most of the afternoon against the Bills. Pennington completed 22 of 35 passes for 182 yards and was intercepted twice. He also lost a fumble.
        Nate Clements returned the first interception of Pennington 58 yards late in the first half to put the Bills ahead, 21-10. Pennington came back before halftime and drove the Jets from their 23 to the Buffalo 20, completing an 18-yard pass to Laveranues Coles along the way and scrambling for 8 yards on a third-and-6 to set up Mike Nugent's 38-yard field goal.
        In the Sunday meeting, Ramsey mentioned the 11-play, 57-yard drive immediately after the interception as something to build on. ''That was big for us,'' he told Pennington.
        Clemens is a rookie who was elevated from the No. 3 quarterback to Pennington's backup last week. He played four downs Sunday, which was long enough to absorb two sacks. ''I listen a lot more than I speak during those powwows,'' Clemens said Monday. ''It's just kind of a chance for Chad to relax and get some of that stuff from the game off his chest.''
        Coach Eric Mangini does not suffer brooders gladly. It cannot be easy for Pennington, the resident perfectionist, to recognize his failings and then move past them in the course of a single conversation, but there he sat with Ramsey and Clemens, dispassionately dissecting his performance.
        If the Jets' emotional temperature can be taken by reading Pennington, there would not appear to be any danger of their slip against the Bills turning into a free fall in their remaining games, at Minnesota, at Miami and at home against Oakland.
        ''I think if you get emotionally tied to it, it can affect you long term, and that's the last thing you want,'' said Ramsey, who started 24 games in his first four seasons, all with the Washington Redskins.
        ''When you don't have one of your best games, what helps me is to just sit and kind of talk about it,'' Ramsey said. ''Not really in a way where it's any kind of criticism, but just kind of talk it out. Maybe put a finger on what happened. So I decided just to talk to Chad, see where his head is. Kind of be there for the guy, you know.''
        By the time Ramsey convened the arms meeting, Pennington had delivered his postgame discourse to the news media in the interview room and Ramsey and Clemens had checked out other scores.
        ''Whether you're out there playing or not, you obviously care about the guy who's in there playing,'' Ramsey said. ''You spend a lot of time with him. We're just kind of hashing out what happened. What went well, what went poorly. We kind of go through plays and things that you think hurt you, things that went well. We're just trying to figure out how to get better.''
        Their conversation lasted less than 15 minutes. When it was over, they got up, gathered their belongings and walked out, leaving their disappointment behind in the locker room.
        EXTRA POINTS
        Running back Kevan Barlow, who has made three starts this year, was inactive for the second consecutive game. He said it was the first time in his six-year N.F.L. career that he had been, in effect, a healthy scratch. ''I think I'm playing on one leg, personally,'' said Barlow, who had arthroscopic surgery on his left knee during the off-season.
        FOOTBALL
      