
        Antitrust authorities here and in the United States and Japan have started an investigation into price-fixing allegations against the world's two leading makers of flat-panel displays, Samsung Electronics and LG.Philips LCD, officials said on Tuesday, shaking an industry already burdened by falling prices.
        Samsung and LG.Philips -- the world's largest and second-largest makers of liquid-crystal displays -- confirmed on Tuesday that they were being investigated by the antitrust authorities in the three countries on suspicion of anticompetitive practices in 2003 and 2004.
        The European Commission confirmed on Tuesday that it, too, had opened a price-fixing investigation into companies that build flat screens. The European Union's executive body said that it sent formal requests for information on Friday to an undisclosed number of companies that make thin-film-transistor and liquid-crystal displays. After LG.Philips, a joint venture involving LG Electronics of Seoul and Royal Philips Electronics of Amsterdam, said that it was under investigation, its share price fell nearly 8 percent before ending the day down 4.2 percent. Investors feared that the company's legal costs, and provisions for possible penalties, might increase its losses in the coming quarters, analysts said. Samsung shares dropped 0.7 percent.
        The news was yet another setback for Samsung. The investigation is the first in the manufacturing of liquid-crystal displays, an industry led by Samsung, but the company is already facing another price-fixing investigation in the United States involving its main product line, computer memory chips.
        The investigation comes at an awkward time for L.C.D. makers; prices plummeted in the first half of 2006 because of supply gluts. Except for Samsung, which often uses price wars to beat its competitors, the major players had to cut production to reduce inventories.
        ''This is very bad news for an industry where companies are suffering either falling profits or fear growing deficits,'' said Michael Min, a senior industry analyst at Korea Investment and Securities. ''The expression that comes to mind to describe their situation is 'misery loves company.' ''
        The scope of the investigation into Samsung and LG.Philips remains unclear. Officials at the Korea Fair Trade Commission, Samsung and LG.Philips declined to discuss details.
        But analysts here said they thought that the regulators might be focusing on whether L.C.D. makers colluded on prices and supplies in 2003 and 2004 when the industry was in an upturn.
        They also speculated that the inquiry might be a coordinated among antitrust bodies in Japan, South Korea and the United States.
        The European investigation is focusing on specific markets, including personal computer and laptop screens, televisions and displays used in mobile phones, digital cameras, Global Positioning System receivers and other hand-held devices. The commission said it had been in contact with other antitrust authorities. No inspections have been carried out in Europe, the commission said, because the companies operate outside the European Union.
      