
        In renewed fighting among Palestinians, gunmen forced a prominent Hamas militant to his knees on Wednesday, then shot him dead outside a courthouse where he worked, in the southern Gaza Strip.
        Hamas, the militant Islamic group that leads the Palestinian government, said a ''death squad'' from the rival Fatah faction was responsible for the killing of the militant, Bassam al-Farra, in Khan Yunis. Fatah denied involvement.
        The shooting occurred just two days after unidentified gunmen in Gaza City killed three sons, ages 3 to 9, of Baha Balousha, a senior Palestinian security officer and Fatah member. ''This is a very dangerous situation,'' said Fauzi Barhoum, a Hamas spokesman. ''There has been an escalation in the violence and the chaos.''
        Hamas and Fatah, the two dominant Palestinian factions, have been trying for months to form a national unity government. However, the talks have broken off, and the violence this week has again raised the prospect of widespread internal fighting, even a civil war.
        Mr. Farra was arriving Wednesday at the courthouse in Khan Yunis in a taxi, when several men grabbed him and forced him to his knees on the sidewalk, while another man shot him, Palestinian witnesses said.
        Palestinian security forces and Hamas militants set up roadblocks, but the gunmen escaped.
        Mr. Farra, who was about 30, was a leading local figure in Hamas's armed wing. He was a judge's assistant at the courthouse, Palestinians said.
        The Palestinian prime minister, Ismail Haniya, of Hamas, who has been traveling in the Middle East for more than two weeks, plans to return to Gaza on Thursday to address the crisis, aides said.
        ''We want to assure you that the words 'civil war' don't exist in our dictionary,'' Mr. Haniya said in Khartoum, Sudan, The Associated Press reported. ''They don't exist in our makeup, in our culture.''
        Palestinian factions have periodically fought one another since the Palestinians began an uprising against Israel in 2000. Criminal gangs and Palestinian clans have also been involved in internecine violence. However, the internal fighting and the sense of lawlessness have increased this year as the political rivalry between Hamas and Fatah has intensified.
        The Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas, of Fatah, is expected to announce his plan soon for ending the political deadlock, and aides have said he is leaning toward new presidential and parliamentary elections. But Hamas has challenged his authority to call new parliamentary elections, and proposing a new round of voting could add to the tensions.
        In other violence on Wednesday, Israeli troops shot dead an armed Palestinian who approached Gaza's perimeter fence, the Israeli military said. The shooting was the first fatality on either side since the Israelis and Palestinians declared a cease-fire in Gaza on Nov. 26. Also, a Palestinian stabbed an Israeli security guard, seriously wounding him, at a checkpoint near the northern edge of Jerusalem, Israeli officials said.
        In another development on Wednesday, Israel's Supreme Court sided with the government, ruling that a section of Israel's West Bank separation barrier, which runs near the northeastern boundary of Jerusalem, could stand. Arab residents in the area had appealed to the court, contending that the barrier greatly disrupted daily life and made it difficult to move between East Jerusalem and other parts of the West Bank.
      