
        The cultural machine of Yoko Ono has many moving parts, and none of them have slowed. Her creative work has taken her to Reykjavik, to Liverpool, to Saigon. Her eclectic interests have ranged from Broadway musicals to documentary films, from satellite radio to interactive art.
        But even as she plays the role of cultural ambassador and trots across the globe, she has fought fiercely to protect the sanctity of her home. She makes her staff sign legal agreements never to breathe a word about her family. She once tried to stop the directors of a feature film from shooting the facade of the Dakota, where she and John Lennon made their home.
        This week came the latest knot in the public-private tangle of her life: her longtime driver, Koral Karsan, was charged in a plot to extort $2 million from her, using threats to kill her and her son.
        At Mr. Karsan's arraignment yesterday, prosecutors said he had claimed to have people ''on standby'' ready to kill Ms. Ono, 73, and Sean Lennon, 31, and that he planned to move to Turkey to write a tell-all book about her life. In a blackmail note, which was read aloud in court, Mr. Karsan announced intentions to use ''e-commerce capability'' to distribute photographs of Ms. Ono on the Internet in Iran.
        The bizarre case has included Mr. Karsan's claim that he had bugged Ms. Ono's Bentley, even though investigators said they had yet to find a recording device in any of her cars. It has also included references to photographs of Ms. Ono in pajamas and to an audiotape on which Sean Lennon is said to describe his father with an obscene anatomical term.
        At the same time, the case has brought into focus the complexities of Ms. Ono's life, which her friends say is governed by dichotomy. On one hand she is, as she has always been, the traditional Japanese woman of aristocratic roots, raised to cover her mouth when she smiles, they said. On the other, she is a canny businesswoman and pop culture icon who sings, paints, travels widely and once held a news conference in bed with Lennon.
        ''She can do her wild, wailing vocals on stage, but when she steps down from that stage she is still a shy, somewhat introverted person,'' said Brian Hendel, a friend for more than 20 years. ''People have this image of her as a crazy, evil dragon lady. But when they meet her, they quickly see she is soft-spoken and has a gentle soul.''
        Either way, like most public figures, Ms. Ono moves in an insulated orbit of security and staff. Her spokesman, Elliot Mintz, said she typically employed up to six full-time workers and a handful of part-time staff members. He refused to discuss her security arrangements, but referred to Ms. Ono as a ''security-conscious'' person who ''takes appropriate measures.'' (A law enforcement official said she had a security detail manned by several former New York City officers.)
        The authorities said the conflict began on Dec. 8, the aniversary of Mr. Lennon's death, when Mr. Karsan accosted Ms. Ono at her apartment and handed her a letter of demands. She went at once to one of her security guards, Dan Mahoney, a former police captain, who three days later called former colleagues at the 20th Precinct, the authorities said.
        The next day, Mr. Karsan spoke with Ms. Ono's lawyer in a recorded conversation that was eventually played for detectives. It was in that conversation that Mr. Karsan ''made threats to the physical safety of Yoko, her son and himself,'' a law-enforcement official said. ''They decided to grab him before anything was going to happen.''
        Mr. Karsan's alleged intrusions into Ms. Ono's privacy were hardly the first. In 1983, Frederic Seaman, a former personal assistant to Mr. Lennon, pleaded guilty to second-degree larceny for stealing family photos and other Lennon artifacts. In 2002, Mr. Seaman settled a civil lawsuit Ms. Ono brought against him, surrendering the rights to hundreds of pictures he took of the couple and offering his apologies in court.
        When Sam Havadtoy, a former companion, was asked if Ms. Ono had a deepening wariness of people she has trusted in her life, he said: ''She has all the reason to have that fear. It is a given.''
        To a large extent, the public feels as if it knows Yoko Ono, but that image is primarily one of the woman with the long hippie hair and big dark glasses cast as a movingly protective wife or a controlling shrew who broke up the Beatles.
        What fewer people know is that Ms. Ono had a rich professional life and identity before she met John Lennon. They met when Lennon wandered into Ms. Ono's show at the Indica Gallery in London in 1966 and climbed a ladder to a panel she had stuck to the ceiling printed with the tiny word, ''yes.'' Ms. Ono was part of Fluxus, an international collective of artists, writers and musicians in the early 1960s who worked outside commercial galleries and staged events now known as performance art.
        While Ms. Ono fiercely guards her private life, she has emphasized public interaction in her work. She is perhaps most famously identified with ''Cut Piece'' (1965), in which she sits calmly while people slowly cut her clothes off. In another work, ''Telephone Piece,'' a phone rings intermittently and passers-by pick it up to find Ms. Ono live at the end of the line.
        ''Yoko protects her privacy, but she is an artist and is very engaging and, like many of the best artists in their personality, they embody much of what is behind their art,'' said Jeffrey Deitch, an art dealer who produced two of Ms. Ono's shows at his gallery in SoHo.
        ''There is a fusion of the conceptual, the poetic, the spiritual and the performative.''
        Ms. Ono's life in the Dakota is largely unknown to the public, which of course is how she likes it. Nonetheless her public appearances are numerous and varied. In the last few months, she has traveled to Iceland to break ground on a peace memorial in Reykjavik and to England for a black-tie gala for a proposed waterfront museum in Liverpool.
        ''She's been around the block,'' said Cyndi Lauper, the singer who has been a friend for 20 years. Ms. Lauper said she admired Ms. Ono for her ability to ''balance her art and her commerce.''
        ''She's a feisty dame, but she is like a contradiction,'' Ms. Lauper said. ''She is also very vulnerable. You kind of feel you want to protect her.''
      