
        American Apparel, the casual clothing chain whose socially conscious manufacturing, sexually charged advertising and snug-fitting T-shirts have generated a cultlike following, will be sold to a little-known investment firm for $382.5 million, according to people briefed on the matter.
        The decision to sell the privately held company, expected to be announced today, is a surprise move by the company's eccentric founder, Dov Charney, who is known for exercising strict, and at times controversial, control over the retailer's operations.
        Mr. Charney, who grew up in Montreal, has personally photographed many of the semi-naked women featured in American Apparel advertising and is known for hiring employees, most of them women, on the spot during telephone calls or at parties.
        American Apparel's buyer, the Endeavor Acquisition Corporation, is a small, publicly traded investment group created last year, with less than $125 million in assets. American Apparel is the firm's first acquisition -- and Endeavor is expected to expand the chain across the globe.
        Endeavor Acquisition was founded as a ''blank check'' firm, intended to buy companies, by Jonathan J. Ledecky, who started U.S. Office Products in 1994, expanding it through 260 acquisitions. U.S. Office Products filed for bankruptcy protection in 2001, a few of years after Mr. Ledecky left.
        Mr. Charney, 37, will remain chief executive of American Apparel after the sale, according to people with direct knowledge of the deal, who discussed the transaction on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly.
        American Apparel, founded in 1997 in Los Angeles, quickly became a retail sensation, with 145 stores and Gap-like ubiquity with eight stores in Los Angeles and 15 in New York City.
        But its sales have slowed significantly in the last year. At stores open at least a year, a crucial measure in retailing, revenue rose 7 percent in 2006, compared with 74 percent in 2004 and 45 percent in 2005, according to documents prepared by Endeavor.
        Still, Endeavor predicted in the documents that American Apparel could reach 800 stores worldwide, which would make it as large as established retail brands like Abercrombie & Fitch and American Eagle Outfitters.
        ''I think we will get beyond that'' number, Mr. Charney said in an interview. ''It's all about manifest destiny. Wherever FedEx goes, we will go.''
        Under the terms of the deal, Endeavor valued American Apparel at $382.5 million, people involved in the purchase said. Endeavor will pay about $250 million in restricted stock; assume $110 million in debt; and pay $23 million in bonuses, restricted stock and stock options to top employees. Endeavor will be paying about 12.7 times earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization on American Apparel's $30 million in earnings this year, a significant premium given the chain's profits. But earnings are expected to grow to $50 million next year.
        Mr. Ledecky said he became interested in American Apparel after several young analysts at his firm, which has a casual dress code, started showing up to work wearing the retailer's signature T-shirts and polos.
        Both Mr. Ledecky and Mr. Charney declined to discuss details of the transaction.
        At the heart of American Apparel are two threads: a high-minded business model that requires clothes to be made in the United States at double minimum wage, and a retro-chic that glamorizes the T-shirt-and-jeans simplicity of the 1970s and 80s.
        All of the clothing is made at a factory in downtown Los Angeles, instead of overseas, where most of its competitors make their apparel. The retailer subsidizes employees' health care, and provides meals as well as free English classes.
        The message has won over thousands of young urban residents -- Mr. Charney refers to them as ''Young Metropolitan Adults'' -- who flock to the chain for bright-colored T-shirts, leggings and underwear. American Apparel is expected to have $275 million in sales this year.
        But as American Apparel has expanded, its founder, Mr. Charney, has been dogged by accusations of sexual harassment and a management style that could make it hard for him to operate within the traditional boundaries of a publicly traded company.
        Mr. Charney has gained a reputation as the Hugh Hefner of retailing, decorating his stores with covers of Penthouse magazine and admitting in interviews to sleeping with employees. In lawsuits filed in 2005, several employees charged him with creating a work environment in which women did not feel safe.
        They claimed in the lawsuits, for example, that Mr. Charney conducted job interviews in his underwear and gave a vibrator to at least one female worker. Mr. Charney has denied the charges, and judges have dismissed one of the lawsuits, two others were combined and settled and one is pending.
        Mr. Charney said yesterday that the media had ''exploited American Apparel on certain issues,'' adding, ''I would never do an interview in my underwear.''
        Speaking generally, Mr. Charney commented, ''I think that like everyone, I have made my mistakes.'' But he continued: ''We have run this company well, having the fastest retail rollout in American history. I am proud of my team.''
        As a result of the lawsuits, however, American Apparel employees must now sign a document that declares: ''American Apparel is in the business of designing and manufacturing sexually charged T-shirts and intimate apparel, and uses sexually charged visual and oral communications in its marketing and sales activity.''
        Mr. Charney said that, in keeping with his policy of paying seamstresses above-average wages, he would ensure that low-level employees received stock in the company, likely worth up to several thousand dollars.
        ''I want this deal to reflect the culture of the company,'' he said. ''I look forward to circulating a memo in Spanish when this deal closes.''
      