
        The Ex makes dry, spindly, trebly, neurotically aggressive music. The title of one of its albums, ''Scrabbling at the Lock,'' suggests its sound rather well.
        The starting point of that sound is punk; it was the band's Square 1, musically and politically, when it started 27 years ago in Amsterdam. But if the most famous punk bands tended toward universal themes, the Ex went local.
        This band plays as if it had set up in a village square. You can't expect drama here: the songs build and clank and bang around, clomping ahead in triplet rhythms, but never explode. The Ex is after something less grand, more low-key and closer to the folk music of countries far less developed than the Netherlands. From time to time the group makes those interests explicit, covering Turkish or Hungarian or African songs, imitating their rhythms and interplay with Terrie Ex and Andy Moor's electric guitars and Katherina Bornfeld's drum kit.
        The band performed at the Knitting Factory on Wednesday, during one of its intermittent tours, and looked a little different: since the last time around, two years ago, it has lost its double-bassist, Rozemarie. It played mostly new songs and a few of what pass for hits.
        One was ''Hidegen Fujnak a Szelek'' (''Cold Winds Are Blowing''), a Hungarian song the band recorded in the early '90s with the improvising cellist Tom Cora; another was ''Theme From Konono,'' based on a riff in ''Kule Kule,'' a song by the Congolese band Konono No. 1. The singer G. W. Sok worked with postpunk's stiff, dour body language but yelled the lyrics as if something were at stake. The songs were organized poetic vignettes from the unglobalized life: average citizens feeling political discomfort.
        The Ex has made some of its best music when collaborating with improvisers. But this show was basically music as theory rather than as sensory pleasure: the torrents of words to describe social inequities, the co-opting of foreign folkloric music, the scratchy sound and jagged rhythm. What saved the music from drudgery was a sense of practiced urgency and all the minor discrepancies in the playing: the rough fit of guitar on guitar, the slightly too-fast or too-slow drumming, the little intonation problems. These were perfected imperfections. It takes nearly 30 years to sound this rough.
        The Ex will perform tonight at Maxwell's in Hoboken, N.J, and tomorrow night at the Grog Shop in Cleveland.
        MUSIC REVIEW
      