
        Do you find women dancing in high-heeled tap shoes antiquated? Sexy? Regressive?
        Perhaps you've never thought about it. But tap-dancers have, and of late they've been debating whether heels represent a step back in an art form in which women have fought to be considered equal to men. Stemming in part from a course on femininity offered in September at Harlem Tap by Dormeshia Sumbry-Edwards, one of tap's most respected dancers, the issue has provoked much online activity, from rants to a survey.
        Not everybody finds the conversation productive.
        ''These are the big debates we're having?'' Sarah Savelli, 29, marveled recently. ''How about the fact that we don't have a stage to dance on in these heels and flats? You're going to spend all of this energy on talking and e-mails and warring. Why don't you make a call and try to get a show together?''
        Working with her fellow tap-dancer Ayodele Casel, 31, Ms. Savelli has done just that. Tired of complaining about the dearth of performance opportunities, they created Tandem Act Productions, which makes its New York debut this weekend with master classes at Chelsea Studios and performances at Symphony Space: the one-woman show ''Who Is Sarah Savelli?'' and a family event, ''Tappy Holidays,'' featuring youth ensembles and standout professionals like Michelle Dorrance, Jason Samuels Smith and Carson Murphy, re-imagining Christmas standards and sharing their own holiday experiences.
        Ms. Savelli's evening, with a talk-show format, is a provocative mix of dancing and conversation about her life as a Cleveland choreographer and a founder of the all-female Chicago troupe Rhythm ISS. She and onstage guests will address issues affecting tap, like abysmal teaching standards in studios around the country and the difficulty facing talented youngsters who are trying to move from youth ensembles to the professional world.
        To address these problems Tandem Act offers customized workshops for local studios and includes talented preprofessionals in its own performances whenever possible; at a ''Tappy Holidays'' performance last weekend in Butte, Mont., Ms. Casel and Ms. Savelli worked with regional youth groups. The women send e-mail invitations to their shows, hand out flyers on the street and try to ignore nightmares about poor ticket sales.
        Their grass-roots efforts are part of a growing movement by tap-dancers in their 20s and 30s. Last spring Ms. Sumbry-Edwards and her husband, the tap-dancer Omar Edwards, opened their Harlem studio with an eye toward creating a serious home for tap. Around the same time Michela Marino-Lerman, then just 19, took on a commission from Dixon Place and created ''AM+bu$h+ED,'' a three-part show that ran in June.
        The next month Derrick Grant's ''Imagine Tap!'' began a four-week run at the Harris Theater for Music and Dance in Chicago. Ms. Casel and Ms. Savelli have significant shows scheduled in New York and Cleveland. Many of these dancers appear in one another's shows.
        ''Imagine Tap!,'' an extravaganza with a cast of 20, features an array of tap styles. Its conscious inclusiveness is an interesting contrast to Savion Glover's 1996 Broadway show ''Bring In da Noise, Bring In da Funk,'' which presented a very specific story in a very specific style. Many younger dancers cite the openness and ambition of Mr. Grant, 33, as a galvanizing force. His show is an apt symbol for a time when tappers are studying new ways of reconnecting audiences with one of America's great art forms.
        ''How do we present these ideas to the people who have the money to make these things possible?'' Ms. Sumbry-Edwards mused recently. ''So many different things could be so big, but I think a lot of us as tap dancers are a little nervous to go away from tradition.''
        Tradition is a thorny word in the tiny, fractious world of tap; unlike in modern dance, with its quest for the new, tap elders cast a grand shadow, and respect for the past is a powerful force, as the high-heel tempest (which mirrors a larger debate about feminism in America today) demonstrates. While younger dancers hasten to stress this respect, some acknowledge impatience with the status quo, from lineup-style shows to a dependency on the festival circuit, which has played a crucial role in revitalizing tap.
        ''Our issues are so different than the younger tappers','' said Jane Goldberg, a dancer and tap historian who helped bring tap back to the public eye in the 1970s and '80s, and who reacted sharply against the Sumbry-Edwards class in an e-mail message widely circulated among dancers. ''We had to do so much more: revive the art form, study it, just get it back on its feet. I think the younger generation just wants to dance.''
        This drive has caused some ripples in the tap establishment. Ms. Savelli heard grumbling from various festival organizers, upset that ''Imagine Tap!'' coincided with their events, and Mr. Grant recounted a top festival producer telling him he couldn't ''just go around'' putting on tap shows on his own.
        ''I would expect that from maybe Joe Public, maybe Mr. Time Warner Cable, but from the executive producer of a tap festival, you're in my game and you're thinking like that?'' Mr. Grant said. ''You don't even have any hope or vision in it going further than it is right now. Oh, my goodness. We've got to take charge.''
        If partnerships like Tandem Act are any indication, Mr. Grant and his peers already have.
        ''I feel like this year we've grown up,'' Ms. Casel said. ''I've gone from the talent who gets hired or is waiting to be hired, to somebody who is, like, 'I need to make this opportunity for myself and consequently make it happen for the art form.' Who else is going to do it? Who loves tap dancing more than we do?''
        ''Who Is Sarah Savelli?'' will be performed Friday at 7:30 p.m. and ''Tappy Holidays'' Sunday at 7 p.m. at Symphony Space, 2357 Broadway, at 95th Street; (212) 864-5400 or symphonyspace.org for tickets; tandemact.org for information about classes.
      