
        Helping A Balky Laptop
        Q. I get an occasional ''insufficient system resources exist to complete the API'' message when I try to put my laptop in hibernation. When I bought this laptop six months ago, I was impressed with its speed in booting and opening programs, but now it has slowed dramatically, even with two gigabytes of RAM. What can I do?
        A. In an article in its technical support database, Microsoft has acknowledged a problem with the hibernation function and computers that have more than one gigabyte of memory installed.
        According to Article No. 909095 (found at support.microsoft.com/kb/909095), many versions of Windows XP Home and Professional -- including systems updated to Service Pack 2, as well as Windows XP Media Center Edition 2005 and Windows XP Tablet PC Edition 2005 -- are affected. The problem occurs because the kernel power manager within Windows can't get the memory it needs to put the PC into hibernation mode. (The kernel is the main module in an operating system and is in charge of handling the memory-, disk- and process-management chores for the computer.)
        Microsoft has a ''hot fix'' update available on the article page and recommends downloading and installing the patch to help with the hibernation problem. You will need to ''validate'' your copy of Windows on the site before you can download the patch, which means letting Microsoft peek over the Internet to make sure your computer is not running a counterfeit copy of Windows.
        The slowness of your laptop's start-up process may be unrelated to the hibernation issue. A number of things can cause a computer to slow, including the number of programs you have set to load automatically when you boot up the machine. Antivirus and other security programs that load at start-up can add time, as can spyware or other sinister software than may have infiltrated your system.
        Another article on Microsoft's site offers general tips for speeding your system, including disconnecting unused network drives and removing programs that start automatically. You can find it at http://tinyurl.com/46u3t.
        Making a Browser Forget the Past
        Q. The Firefox browser seems to remember everything I type in search boxes. How can I stop this?
        A. Mozilla's Firefox browser can save information you have previously typed into Web forms and search boxes. If you would rather it not do that, go to the Tools menu to the Options box and click the Privacy tab. Mac users can find the Privacy settings Preferences area of the Firefox application menu.
        Once in the Privacy settings, uncheck the box next to ''Remember what I enter in forms and the search bar'' and then click O.K.
        Scanning Slides By Hand
        Q. I have about 500 good Leica images on slides that I want to put on a CD or DVD. The options seem to range from $1 to $2 per slide for professional scanning to cheaper mail-in slide-transfer companies. Is there a good, reasonably priced scanner I can buy to do it myself?
        A. Scanners that can convert 35-millimeter slides to digital images generally come in two types: regular flatbed scanners that have a slide-tray attachment, or a dedicated slide scanner. Of the two, flatbed scanners tend to be less expensive but slower, and some people find the color images produced to be of lesser quality than using a more expensive, dedicated slide scanner. Scanners designed just to do slides and film negatives tend to cost at least $350 and can run well past $1,000.
        Many flatbed scanners, especially those designed for scanning both prints and slides, come with a slide attachment that lets you scan up to four slides at a time. Major scanner manufacturers like Hewlett-Packard and Canon typically have models for $100 to $200 that can scan slides.
        Sites like Photo.net (www.photo.net/ezshop/category) and Imaging Resource (www.imaging-resource.com/SCAN1.HTM) have reviews of different scanners available, and can provide more information. Attachments like the Nikon SF-210 Auto Slide Feeder can let you scan up to 50 slides at a time, but they cost $300 or more and may require the use of a specific scanner model.
        Image-editing programs designed for home users, like Adobe Photoshop Elements or Apple's iPhoto, can also help enhance scanned slides and burn them to a disc once you get them on the computer.
        J. D. BIERSDORFER
        Q & A
      