
        Qantas Airways, Australia's largest airline, agreed on Thursday to accept a sweetened buyout offer of 11.1 billion Australian dollars ($8.7 billion) from a consortium led by Macquarie Bank and the Texas Pacific Group.
        In a statement, the board of Qantas said it would recommend that shareholders allow the company to be taken private. If the deal goes ahead, it will be Australia's biggest takeover, and would be the latest move in a global revival in airline stocks, which have languished since Sept. 11, 2001.
        ''The directors believe this offer allows Qantas shareholders to realize significant value for their shares that has not been fully recognized in the public market,'' the chairman, Margaret Jackson, said Thursday.
        The bid values the company at 5.60 Australian dollars a share, substantially more than its closing price on Wednesday of 5.09 Australian dollars and analysts' prebid valuations of 4.10 to 4.60 Australian dollars.
        The consortium -- Airline Partners Australia -- includes Texas Pacific, Macquarie Bank, Allco Equity Partners and the Allco Finance Group of Australia, and Onex, the Canadian leveraged buyout company.
        The group also brings together an array of aviation talent, including David Bonderman of Texas Pacific; Rod Eddington of Allco Finance, the former chief executive of British Airways; and David Turnbull of Allco Finance, formerly of Cathay Pacific.
        Few analysts expect investors to block the deal.
        The board had rejected an offer of 5.50 Australian dollars a share on Wednesday. In addition to the increased offer, the bidders agreed to drop their demand for a 1 percent breakup fee.
        Matt Crowe, an analyst with J. P. Morgan in Sydney, said he believed that it was not just the price that swayed the board's decision.
        ''Qantas management have been frustrated for some time by the progress of their cost-reduction program,'' Mr. Crowe said. ''It is harder to make difficult cost reductions that might cause disruption in the short term. Going private will make that easier.''
        Within the consortium, a complex division of the shareholdings is intended to satisfy the Australian government's requirement that no more than 49 percent of the company is foreign-owned.
        Onex and Texas Pacific will hold less than 40 percent of the airline, with Allco Equity Partners expected to hold about 34 percent; the Allco Finance Group, 11 percent; and Macquarie, less than 15 percent.
        The arrangement is also unlikely to jeopardize Qantas's participation in bilateral air services agreements -- the arrangements between countries that stipulate which airline is allowed to fly what routes and at what capacity -- that require that participating airlines be ''substantially'' domestically owned.
        ''If this acquisition is successful, Qantas will remain a majority Australian-owned, Australia-based airline,'' Ms. Jackson said.
        Qantas's chief executive, Geoff Dixon, will stay on. Peter Harbison of the Center for Asia Pacific Aviation in Sydney, said that although the airline was already one of the world's most profitable, Mr. Dixon was preparing for a time of less government protection and was betting that the new ownership would give Qantas easier access to capital to continue its expansion beyond Australia into the growth areas of Asia.
      