
        Raymond P. Shafer, the former Pennsylvania governor who oversaw a revamping of the state's Constitution and led a drug commission for President Richard M. Nixon that recommended decriminalizing marijuana, died Tuesday in his hometown, Meadville, Pa. He was 89.
        The cause was complications of congestive heart failure, said his son, Phil.
        The son of a minister from rural Pennsylvania, Mr. Shafer rose through the political ranks before serving as Pennsylvania's governor from 1967 to 1971. He could have risen to even higher office in 1968; President Nixon asked him to be his vice-presidential candidate, to balance the ticket with a moderate Easterner.
        But because he was an ally of President Nixon's rival, Nelson Rockefeller, and ''because he didn't trust Nixon,'' his son said, Mr. Shafer turned down the offer.
        Later, when Mr. Shafer was barred by term limits from seeking re-election to the governor's office, President Nixon declined to appoint him to a federal judgeship and appointed him instead as chairman of the National Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse.
        In 1972, when what became known as the Shafer Commission released a report recommending that the federal government decriminalize the personal use of marijuana, but not make it legal, the findings stunned the Republican establishment.
        President Nixon promptly rejected the findings of the 13-member commission, telling reporters, ''I do not believe you can have effective criminal justice based on the philosophy that something is half legal and half illegal.''
        Mr. Shafer was a college soccer and basketball star at his alma mater, Allegheny College in Meadville, Pa., where he met his wife, Jane, before earning a law degree at Yale University. During World War II he was captain of a PT boat and was awarded a Purple Heart and Bronze Star.
        In addition to his wife and son, of Meadville, he is survived by a daughter, Diane Graham, also of Meadville, three grandchildren and one great-grandchild.
        Taking politically risky stands was not unusual for Mr. Shafer, who worked as a lawyer until five years ago.
        After winning his seat as governor, he set out on a campaign to bolster the state's education and public assistance spending, proposing the state's first income tax to help pay for it.
        His efforts led opponents to give him the nickname Dudley Do-Right, because, like the cartoon character, he had a prominent chin and was derided for doing the wrong thing for the right reason.
        The income tax proposal and large increase in state spending proved to be a political disaster. Support for him and his party plummeted and Republicans lost not only the governor's race in 1971 but also the state House and Senate.
        Before he left office, he oversaw his proudest political accomplishment, putting into effect historic changes in the state Constitution. The changes included creating the state's first unified judicial system, giving governors a two-term limit, and allowing for a state income tax -- which was approved during the tenure of his successor, Milton J. Shapp.
        ''He knew it had to be done,'' his son said. ''He basically spent all of his political capital to get that.''
        Editors' Note:  December 23, 2006, Saturday  An obituary on Dec. 14 about Raymond P. Shafer, a former governor of Pennsylvania, stated that Richard M. Nixon had asked him to be his vice-presidential running mate in 1968. That unattributed information was supplied by Mr. Shafer's son and daughter, who said their father had told them of the offer in private conversations. The article should have included the source of that account and efforts should have been made to corroborate it. Additional research has turned up no documentation that would prove or disprove the statement.
      