
        Real Salt Lake has his number -- and Freddy Adu could not be happier.
        ''I want to thank the club for giving me No. 11,'' Adu said yesterday during an introductory news conference in Salt Lake City, one day after he was traded to Real Salt Lake by D.C. United. ''It's always been my number, but I was never able to get it in D.C. because Eski wouldn't give it up.'' He was referring to his former teammate Alecko Eskandarian.
        Adu, a marketing dynamo who garnered unprecedented attention for Major League Soccer and was its highest-paid player when he signed as a 14-year-old three years ago, has gone west. He showed moments of brilliance with D.C. United, but not nearly enough. He clashed with his headstrong coach, Peter Nowak, over how many minutes he played and at what position. Adu never seemed to adjust to the cold shower of reality that is the professional game.
        In Utah, Adu has been reunited with John Ellinger, who was his coach with the United States under-17 national team, a run that culminated at the 2003 world championship.
        ''I cannot be happier here,'' Adu said. ''This is something I wanted. I feel reborn. This is a new chapter in my life. I will get to play my natural position, I'll get games and get better and help this team out.''
        Under Ellinger, Real Salt Lake has won only 15 of 64 games since it joined M.L.S. in 2005. Ellinger immediately slotted Adu, who will not turn 18 until June, into his lineup as an attacking midfielder. Adu had played on the flank for D.C. United.
        Adu, who makes more than $500,000 a year, is under contract to M.L.S. through the 2007 season (and a two-year league option), according to his agent, Richard Motzkin. Adu and his representatives have made it clear that he sees a future in Europe, even though he has been perceived as not aggressive or experienced enough to play with a top club overseas. Last week in England, Adu finished a short stint training with Manchester United's reserve team.
        He will miss some league games next summer playing for the United States under-20 national team if it qualifies for the world championship in Canada.
        ''At some point in his career, Freddy would certainly like to get to Europe,'' Motzkin said in a telephone interview from the Salt Lake City airport. ''He's as excited and happy about being an M.L.S. player as I've ever seen him. This is a fresh challenge and he needs to play well.''
        He added: ''At this point, going into his fourth year in the league, I think Freddy wanted to have a challenge, to run a team in the middle of the field, and that was not going to happen in D.C. It was an opportunity that John Ellinger was ready to provide.''
        AROUND M.L.S. -- New England midfielder Clint Dempsey is likely to move to Fulham of the English Premier League next month for a $2.5 million transfer fee, a figure that could rise depending on how much he plays for the club, which is based in London. Fulham has two other Americans on its roster: striker Brian McBride and defender Carlos Bocanegra.  Brescia, in the middle of the standings in Serie B in Italy, is pursuing Colorado midfielder Pablo Mastroeni. Mastroeni was born in Argentina and has played for the United States national team. He would be eligible to play under European Union rules because he holds an Italian passport.
        ARGENTINA -- Boca Juniors and Estudiantes will play a one-game playoff today to decide the champion of a tumultuous Apertura (opening tournament). The match will be the first title-deciding playoff since 1991.
        Boca, which is led by Ricardo La Volpe, the former coach of the Mexican national team, lost only once in its first 17 games of the season. It needed only 1 point from its two final matches to clinch the championship after having led Estudiantes by 4 points with two games to play.
        The season has been plagued by problems: three matches were abandoned because of crowd trouble; a game between Racing and San Lorenzo was postponed hours before kickoff when fans would not allow team buses to travel to the stadium; the federation tried to bar away fans from attending games but had to back down after protests; and Boca's game Sept. 10 against Gimnasia was suspended at halftime after the referee was threatened. It was completed two months later.
        WORLD CUP -- FIFA has decided that South America will again be permitted to use a 10-team single group qualifying format for the 2010 World Cup, with games scheduled to begin in September or October. European club teams have complained that the system, used for the past three World Cup qualifying competitions, forces players to make too many trans-Atlantic trips. In a small change to the qualifying system, FIFA decided that the fourth-place team from Concacaf, the region that includes the United States, will play the fifth-place team from South America for a spot in the Cup.
        NOTES -- The draw for the first knockout stage of the European Champions League, which will begin in February, will be Friday in Nyon, Switzerland.  The United States women's national team will play its first domestic match next year against an opponent to be determined as part of the doubleheader with two M.L.S. teams on April 14 in Foxborough, Mass. New England and Toronto F.C. will play in the second game. The American woman will take part in two tournaments, in China and in Portugal, early next year.  ESPN acquired the rights to televise the 2008 European Championship, which will be played in Austria and Switzerland. All 31 games will be shown on ABC, ESPN, ESPN2 or ESPN Classic. The network also acquired the Spanish-language rights for the United States and will show games on ESPN Deportes.
        SOCCER REPORT
      