
        The linkage is troubling. There are sharp cuts in the budget and staff for the federal agency charged with keeping the nation's supply of fresh produce safe -- and soon we are faced with repeated cases of food poisoning from vegetables and fruits.
        Two outbreaks of bacterial poisoning from fresh produce over the past three months, and a possible third that is still under investigation, raise doubts about the Food and Drug Administration's ability to inspect and monitor conditions on the nation's farms and in the plants that package and process their produce.
        After 9/11, the F.D.A. received a brief infusion of new money to bolster its inspections lest terrorists be able to contaminate the food supply. But that zeal soon wore off, and the Bush administration and Congress began reining in domestic spending to help pay for tax cuts for the wealthy and the war in Iraq. As Andrew Martin reported in Monday's Times, operating funds for the F.D.A.'s Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition have dropped from $48 million in 2003 to an estimated $25 million for next year. Over the same period, the number of full-time inspectors fell from about 2,200 to 1,962.
        Although F.D.A. officials insist that funding constraints have not hampered its work, that seems hard to believe given that the number of inspections for food safety fell sharply from 2005 to 2006. Meanwhile, the agency's workload has been rising steadily as health-conscious Americans eat more fruit and vegetables.
        The Agriculture Department, which regulates meat and poultry, has had success in recent years cutting the number of bacterial outbreaks. It has a food safety budget more than twice the size of the F.D.A.'s, and it has almost four times as many inspectors to monitor far fewer plants. While the Agriculture Department typically has inspectors sitting in meat processing plants -- empowered to shut them down to correct safety problems -- the understaffed F.D.A. infrequently inspects the plants that package or process fruits and vegetables, and almost never inspects the growing fields until after a crisis arises.
        At a minimum, Congress needs to provide the F.D.A. with more money and more inspectors to monitor the safety of fresh produce all the way from field to consumer. It should also abandon the fiction that voluntary guidelines to ensure safe food production can do the job, and insist instead on some kind of mandatory regulation.
        It is also time to revive the long-languishing notion that all of the government's disparate food regulation activities should be combined into a single, fully empowered agency. It is absurd that lettuce should be regulated more lightly than beefsteak.
        Editorial
      