
        Daisuke Matsuzaka received his first tour of Fenway Park on Thursday afternoon, even though the fabled ballpark looked like a construction site. A chain link fence encircled the field, a Dumpster was filled with debris, and tarpaulin covered the outfield and the plate. But the mound was not covered.
        Matsuzaka, who had a baseball in his hand, noticed that the mound was one of the only places on the field that looked the way it will look in April. John Henry, the principal owner of the Red Sox, encouraged Matsuzaka, his new $103.1 million pitcher, to test it.
        So Matsuzaka strolled to the mound, a gloveless Henry crouched behind the plate and Matsuzaka threw his first pitch at Fenway to the man who will sign his paychecks. Matsuzaka's pitch was high so Henry leaped for it, stumbled backwards and narrowly missed landing in a puddle on the tarpaulin.
        "We didn't go over the signals," Henry said.
        Henry smiled as he recounted the Matsuzaka's errant pitch; Matsuzaka smiled then and throughout most of his introductory news conference. After 29 days of negotiations that General Manager Theo Epstein said had their "ups and downs" and included some tense moments, the Red Sox and Scott Boras, Matsuzaka's agent, agreed to a six-year, $52 million contract late Wednesday.
        The Red Sox welcomed Matsuzaka here by showing his picture on the video scoreboard in center field and listing his name in Japanese. Larry Lucchino, the club's president, said, "Welcome to Boston," in Japanese to Matsuzaka. The club also served sushi to more than 300 reporters who attended an event that had the feel of the moments before a postseason game.
        "We understand his importance in Japan," Epstein said. "We know what he represents."
        After posting $51.1 million, the Red Sox won the right to negotiate with Matsuzaka and sweated it out before getting a deal. Matsuzaka, who was 108-60 with a 2.95 earned run average for the Seibu Lions, wore a black suit with red pinstripes and a red and black striped. He is still learning what it means to be pitch for the Red Sox, whose fans are as passionate as any in baseball.
        "Everybody told me I should say I'm going to beat the Yankees," Matsuzaka said, through a translator. "I thought it was a joke so I didn't say that."
        According to Japanese reporters, Matsuzaka's news conference was given live coverage nationally in Japan. When it began, it was 7 a.m. in Japan.
        "It's going to be big morning news," said Yasuko Yanagita, a reporter with the Hochi Shimbun, a sports newspaper.
        The souvenir store on Yawkey Way did not yet have Matsuzaka T-shirts or jerseys with his number 18, Johnny Damon's old number. But Amanda Geggatt, who works at the store, said the phone had been ringing nonstop with requests for Matsuzaka items.
        "If it rings one more time," she said, "I'm going to pull it out of the wall."
        But the phone is bound to keep ringing. Matsuzaka mania is just beginning in Boston. The Red Sox feel Matsuzaka is one of the elite pitchers in the world and they are anxious for him to show it. Matsuzaka is eager to throw a pitch at Fenway that matters.
        "As a member of the Boston Red Sox, I'd like to contribute to a World Series," Matsuzaka said. "And I'd like to meet Curt Schilling."
        BASEBALL
      