
        Samuel R. Berger, the former national security adviser to President Bill Clinton, went to such lengths to conceal his theft of classified material from the National Archives that he hid some of the documents under a trailer at a construction site, according to a government report released Wednesday.
        The report, prepared by the National Archives inspector general, provided new details about an episode that caused a brief stir in the 2004 presidential campaign and led to a guilty plea to a misdemeanor charge by Mr. Berger a year later.
        In 2003, Mr. Berger spent several days at the National Archives reviewing classified material as the Clinton administration's designated liaison to the Sept. 11 commission. He later admitted that he took and destroyed several versions of a classified report prepared in 2000 on the so-called millennium terrorist plots, although the commission had copies of the same reports.
        The report on Wednesday disclosed that during a visit to the National Archives in October 2003, Mr. Berger removed four versions of the 2000 report and took them with him when he left the building for a walk after dark.
        ''He was aware of the risk he was taking,'' the report said, and ''he did not want to run the risk of bringing the documents back in the building,'' where he might be detected. So he found a nearby construction site and, slid the documents under a trailer. He later returned to the construction site, retrieved the documents and later destroyed some of them. Several days later, archives staff members confronted him.
        Still unresolved in the inspector general's report is one lingering mystery in the episode: Whether, as Mr. Berger's critics have charged, he was so cavalier as to stuff classified documents in his socks.
        The report said one witness at the archives saw Mr. Berger bending down and ''fiddling with something white, which could have been paper, around his ankle.'' But Mr. Berger denied he had ever stuffed documents in his socks, explaining the episode by saying that ''his shoes frequently come untied and his socks frequently fall down.''
        When the episode first became public, in 2004, Mr. Berger was forced to step down as an adviser to Senator John Kerry's presidential campaign. In 2005, he agreed to plead guilty to unauthorized removal of classified documents. He was fined $50,000 but received no jail time.
        Mr. Berger's lawyer, Lanny Breuer, said Wednesday that his client considered the matter closed and was seeking to move on.
      