
        Over the last two decades, this city has transcended its blue-collar roots and become a cosmopolitan outpost of renovated brownstones, luxury condominiums and fashionable shops. Yet prosperity has skipped over the city's only hospital -- and also New Jersey's oldest -- St. Mary Hospital, which has lost nearly $100 million in the last five years.
        Situated in an area that health care analysts say already has too many hospitals, St. Mary is usually unable to fill even half of its 328 beds and needs million of dollars in renovations. In the New Jersey Hospital Association's recent analysis of the finances of 55 troubled hospitals in the state, St. Mary was found to be in the worst shape.
        But as New Jersey looks for ways to close as many as two dozen of its financially troubled hospitals, St. Mary, which was founded in 1863, has escaped that threat, at least temporarily.
        When the owner, the Bon Secours Health Care System, a Maryland company run by an order of Roman Catholic nuns, announced this spring that it planned to close the hospital, city officials, including the mayor, David Roberts, state legislators and the governor's office pieced together an unusual plan to keep it afloat by having the city take it over and pumping in an infusion of public funds.
        To head this new venture, officials have proposed a former board chairman of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, which is currently under federal supervision for defrauding Medicaid and squandering hundreds of millions of tax dollars in the past decade. The proposed leader, Harvey A. Holzberg, has never himself been accused of any wrongdoing at the state medical school.
        Some critics contend the officials intervened because Hoboken is home to Gov. Jon S. Corzine, Senator Robert Menendez and the Senate majority leader, Bernard F. Kenny Jr. And Assemblywoman Joan M. Quigley of Hudson County, one of the hospital's administrators, sits on the powerful Budget and Appropriations Committee.
        But supporters say a city takeover is a prudent solution because converting the hospital to a publicly run entity will make it eligible for tens of millions of dollars in additional state and federal funds. The plan also asks the City of Hoboken to guarantee $52 million in bonds to upgrade the hospital, a proposal that is awaiting review by the state's Local Finance Board and is scheduled for a vote by the City Council this month.
        Although that figure would double Hoboken's current debt, Ms. Quigley said the risk to the city was limited. Even if the hospital were to fail, the land, which the Bon Secours nuns are selling to Hoboken for $1, is valued at more than $30 million.
        She and other hospital supporters say it is essential that St. Mary be saved because Hoboken is often clogged by traffic from the Holland Tunnel, and it can take city residents half an hour or more to drive to the Jersey City Medical Center, the next-closest emergency room.
        ''This community needs a hospital,'' Ms. Quigley said. ''And when no one else was willing to meet that obligation, Mayor Roberts came up with an innovative way to do it.''
        But some Hoboken residents, concerned that the venture is an expensive gamble that could threaten the fiscal viability of the city, have called for less costly alternatives, like keeping the emergency care unit open but converting the rest of the hospital into clinics or housing for the elderly.
        Moreover, they say that St. Mary's $130 million annual budget is more than the city and school budget combined, and that if the city were one day forced to repay the bonds, Hoboken's already steep property taxes could shoot even higher.
        ''Public hospitals are failing all over the country and Hoboken has no experience running a hospital,'' said Tony Soares, a former City Council president. ''It's nice to try and save jobs and to have an emergency room still in the community. But I don't want to live in a bankrupt city.''
        Still, thousands of residents have rallied to save St. Mary, which provides 1,000 jobs, convenient health care and civic pride. Mayor Roberts says it is ''unimaginable'' that his bustling community would be without a hospital.
        Because of the city's status as a transportation hub just a PATH train stop from Manhattan, Mr. Roberts says the hospital has the potential to be a prestigious health care center and an economic powerhouse.
        ''This can be one of the premier health care facilities in the state,'' said Mr. Holzberg, the man chosen to lead the new hospital, and who helped lead a similar turnaround at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick.
        Mr. Holzberg said he planned to overhaul the emergency room at St. Mary, renovate the hospital to provide more semiprivate rooms, and improve the food to attract more patients. He has also proposed strengthening ties with teaching hospitals in the area -- a sentiment that made him propose changing the name to Hoboken University Hospital even though there is no Hoboken University.
        In a detailed business plan describing the aspirations for St. Mary, three pages are devoted to Mr. Holzberg's successes at Robert Wood Johnson, but there is no mention of his more recent experience at the troubled University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, where he was a board member from 1997 to 2003, serving as chairman for a year.
        He said it was unfair to hold him accountable for the financial mismanagement there. ''I was the on the board, not the C.E.O.,'' Mr. Holzberg said. ''And I was never accused of anything improper. Nothing.''
        But residents here who are skeptical of the proposal say it is also missing other important pieces of information. Among their concerns are these:
        How will Hoboken pay off the bonds if the hospital fails and the city's real estate market continues to soften?
        How will the city fill the hospital's budget gap if the anticipated federal aid does not materialize?
        Who will cover the high pension and severance costs if the hospital has to be closed, and how much will Mr. Holzberg be paid to manage the hospital?
        ''We're making this major long-term commitment, but there are so many unanswered questions,'' said Michael Lenz, Hoboken's former chief financial officer, who is opposed to the takeover.
        As the bailout plan for St. Mary inches forward, Wall Street bond analysts and other New Jersey communities where hospitals are endangered are watching closely.
        Mr. Corzine signed a bill in June authorizing Hoboken and other cities to form authorities to run their own hospitals, after Ms. Quigley cast the deciding vote in favor of his controversial budget plan in the Assembly committee, though the two say those two issues were unrelated. Mr. Corzine also says his residency in Hoboken did not sway him and that he supports the city's takeover of St. Mary on its own merits.
        Still, many critics of the plan say Mr. Corzine placed the future of the hospital above his call for fiscal prudence because he lives here.
        ''Why rush into this risky, expensive proposal?'' said Beth Mason, a Hoboken resident. ''Why not make it a model of fiscal responsibility? We should take the time to give the city a plan that's workable, that meets our community's need and that doesn't threaten to destroy our finances.''
      