
        President Bush reversed a decades-old ban on nuclear cooperation with India on Monday, signing legislation allowing the United States to sell civilian nuclear fuel and technology to India for the first time since that country tested a nuclear device in 1974.
        Mr. Bush, who has taken a hard line against nuclear programs in Iran and North Korea, negotiated the atomic energy pact during a visit to India in March, and Congress approved the measure shortly before adjourning this month. In return for access to American technology, India must now open its nuclear program to international inspection.
        ''This is an important achievement for the whole world,'' Mr. Bush said during a signing ceremony in the East Room of the White House. ''After 30 years outside the system, India will now operate its civilian nuclear program under internationally accepted guidelines, and the whole world is going to be safer as a result.''
        Critics say the pact will open the door to nuclear proliferation. Representative Edward J. Markey, the Massachusetts Democrat who has been a leading opponent of the bill, said it ''may well become the death warrant to the international nuclear nonproliferation regime.''
        The White House counters that the pact serves American strategic interests by strengthening ties between India and the United States, the world's two largest democracies, and that it has no plans to offer a similar deal to any other country, including Pakistan. Mr. Markey's view appears to be a minority one, even among Democrats.
        ''The administration, I think, rightly argued that India is a unique case,'' said Bruce Riedel, who advised President Clinton on South Asia, adding, ''It's a democracy with a proven track record of not exporting its technology.''
        Yet Congress was concerned about the possibility that India might export its technology, so much so that lawmakers inserted a provision requiring Mr. Bush to certify that India was not transferring nuclear material or technology to Iran. R. Nicholas Burns, the under secretary of state for political affairs, said the White House construed the reporting requirement as advisory, a stance that Mr. Bush underlined by issuing a signing statement clarifying the White House's interpretation of the bill.
        Speaking to reporters before the signing on Monday, Mr. Burns said the administration was satisfied that India, which twice voted to impose sanctions on Iran for its nuclear activities, ''also wishes to deny Iran a nuclear weapons capability.''
      