
        Assuming a new name has often been part of the immigration experience. Now this Long Island hamlet, bruised for a decade by its reputation as a place where illegal immigrant day laborers crowd into rooming houses, is considering a name change of its own.
        Farmingville, or at least the more affluent half of it, where few if any of the new immigrants live, would have itself be known instead as the village of Oak Hills.
        Some people here acknowledge this is a kind of white flight by incorporation -- a maneuver pioneered 20 years ago when an enclave within the increasingly Hispanic community of Central Islip, in Suffolk County, broke off to become the village of Islandia.
        But many of the homeowners here who have signed a secession petition in recent days say that they are not leaving Farmingville -- Farmingville has left them.
        Now known as an illegal immigrants' haven, the community has been the scene of frequent demonstrations by residents, and by groups that come periodically to taunt the day laborers. On CNN, Lou Dobbs marks Farmingville with pushpins regularly on the map of his continuing crusade against illegal immigration.
        And then there is the movie. A documentary based on a 2000 attack in which two men beat two Mexican day laborers almost to death evinced a complex portrait of the community but left the overriding impression that Farmingville is a place without pity. The film, which won a Sundance Film Festival prize, is titled simply -- and many here think unfairly -- ''Farmingville.''
        ''It seems like every time something is said about Farmingville, it's a negative rather than a positive,'' said Del DeMarino, 63, a resident since 1972 who is the chief organizer of the Committee for an Incorporated Village. ''It's just not possible to change that now.''
        Demographers say the majority of immigrants are now settling in suburbia, where frustration with perceived federal inaction against illegal newcomers has led to a variety of ad-hoc local initiatives. In Suffolk County, for example, there have been crackdowns on overcrowded rooming houses in Farmingville and other areas, and laws passed against employment of illegal immigrants, neither of which has had much effect.
        Unable to build fences like the 700-mile one proposed for the Mexican border, a handful of unincorporated communities like Farmingville are seizing on self-rule as a tool of self-preservation -- or, as some see it, self-segregation.
        ''We know what they're talking about when they say they want to separate from 'Farmingville' -- they mean the Mexicans,'' said William White, a local resident who opposes the name change.
        Mr. DeMarino, a salesman for a shipping company and a Republican active in local politics, said immigration was not his only motivation.
        There are fingers of other ZIP codes and hamlets that lie across parts of Farmingville, and the new village would incorporate them, he said, ''giving us one identity.'' There is also a state road improvement project about to begin, and an incorporated village may be able to wield more influence over it than an unincorporated area.
        But as he steered his Jeep through streets of widely spaced homes, elaborately decorated for Christmas, on the wealthier side of Farmingville that would become Oak Hills, Mr. DeMarino acknowledged that it was mainly the ''stigma thing.''
        ''See that house?'' he said, pointing to a two-story colonial-style home with a broad lawn. ''That house has been on the market for eight months. He dropped the price three times. Nice house. But if you are trying to sell a house in Farmingville, you have a problem.''
        Asked if that might have more to do with the slowing real estate market, Mr. DeMarino said Farmingville's notoriety compounded the problem.
        Hard by the Long Island Expressway, Farmingville is an unincorporated area in the Town of Brookhaven. According to the 2000 census, 8 percent of its 16,000 residents were Hispanic, up from 3 percent in 1990.
        In what passes for downtown, a stretch of broad boulevard dividing the east and west sides of Farmingville, the storefronts feature an unusual number of Laundromats within a few short blocks (three), money-order vendors specializing in international transfers and inexpensive, footlocker-size luggage (two), and window advertisements in Spanish (innumerable).
        Miriam Valenciano, who owns a small house behind the downtown district, was skeptical when told about the proposed name change. ''You mean we'll have an upper-class Farmingville and a lower-class Farmingville,'' she said. ''That's what it sounds like to me. I think it's a little derogatory.''
        Inside a variety store, a man who gave his name only as John bought large stacks of tickets from a New York State Lottery machine. ''What about the taxes?'' he said when asked about the Oak Hills proposal. ''They start a new village, there's new taxes, right? I don't want nothing to do with it.''
        Advocates of the plan say residents of the new village would have to pay only a minimal amount in new taxes to cover clerical costs. Services like garbage collection, road maintenance and snow removal would probably be handled through a contract with the township, and are unlikely to significantly change most residents' tax bills.
        Exact boundaries have not been determined, but the proposed village of Oak Hills -- named for the oak trees that thrive in the sandy soil of this part of the island -- would be a tract of land in the western half of Farmingville where homes sell for about $500,000 and up, according to local real estate agents. It would exclude houses in the eastern half that are generally valued about $100,000 less.
        Many of those cheaper houses on the east side have been converted, often illegally, into makeshift apartments for the men who get picked up in trucks for construction and landscaping jobs each morning.
        ''I've got nothing against those people, they work hard, but I think we have a right to protect our property values,'' said Joseph Alfini, 53, a retired electrician who lives in the core of the proposed village. ''The landlords who rent these rooms out, they cannot afford to buy houses over here. If we have our own building department, we can keep it that way.''
        The Rev. Alan Ramirez, a vigorous defender of the day laborers, said of the movement: ''They don't need to change their name. What they need to change is their attitude of hostility toward their neighbors.''
        State law requires any new village to have a minimum of 500 inhabitants and a contiguous area of not more than five square miles; Oak Hills would probably have about 3,000 residents. Once petitions are signed by 20 percent of the registered voters within the proposed boundaries, a majority vote in an election referendum would establish the new village.
        Farmingville's secessionists began collecting petitions last month and hope to hold an election early in the new year.
        Mr. DeMarino, the leader of the campaign, was interviewed at his home the other day while a crew of three Spanish-speaking women cleaned his house. A member of the town Republican committee, he has run twice unsuccessfully for councilman in the Town of Brookhaven.
        Asked whether he might like to be mayor of Oak Hills someday, Mr. DeMarino smiled and said, ''I cannot entertain that notion at this time.''
        Correction:  December 21, 2006, Thursday  An article on Saturday about an effort by some residents of Farmingville, N.Y., to incorporate as the village of Oak Hills misstated the political affiliation of Del DeMarino, the lead organizer of the campaign. He is a Democrat, and a member of the Brookhaven Town Democratic Committee; not a Republican.
      