
        THE fabulous news that the Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North Railroad have forked over $102,009.17 to compensate passengers for clothing torn by their famously destructive armrests during the last four years could not possibly have come at a better time.
        Like a lot of middle-aged men, I've beefed up a tad in the past few years, and am now stuck with half a dozen suit jackets that no longer fit me. Toss in at least as many trousers that are two sizes too small and that leather overcoat that's starting to pinch around the waist and you can see that I'm seriously overstocked with obsolete men's wear.
        But since the local transportation authorities now seem to be in such a generous mood, my plan is to make a remunerative foray into the city, surreptitiously hook my jacket onto one of the poorly designed armrests, rip a gaping hole that simply cannot be repaired and wait for my check. Since the jacket I have in mind is a Burberry that retailed for $595 in 1994, and therefore qualifies as a vintage collector's item, I have no doubt that Metro-North will do the right thing and pony up at least half the original cost of the garment.
        A couple of days ago, with no Bush tax cuts to bail me out this Yuletide season, there was virtually no chance that my son was getting an Xbox 360 for Christmas. Now things are looking very good indeed.
        The financial bonanza awaiting local commuters got started a few years back when both the Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North introduced a fleet of snappy new cars. The M7 cars, it is almost universally agreed, are cheerful little numbers with bright lights, comfortable seats and functioning bathrooms; I personally find them a joy to ride.
        Unfortunately, almost from the outset, passengers began to complain that the M7 armrests were designed in such a way that clothing easily got snagged on them, resulting in tears, rips and in some instances the incontrovertible destruction of the garment in question. Last year, the railroad paid out as much as $1,400 to replace a Paul Stuart suit. All told, Long Island Rail Road has made good on roughly 40 percent of the claims and the far more lenient Metro-North has paid out a staggering 90 percent of the claims.
        Were either the Long Island or Metro-North nicer railroads, renowned for their congenial and helpful staffs, I would never resort to such churlish duplicity as faking an armrest catastrophe. But factoring in the number of times I have been charged a penalty for buying a ticket on the train even when the ticket machine in my station was not working, and mindful that just last week a conductor accused me of trying to beat the fare into the city -- an insult for which he did not subsequently apologize -- and thinking back on all those smelly bathrooms and doors that failed to open at my stop, and boisterous drunks the conductors made no effort to detrain over the years, this sounds like payback time. A snagged Burberry here, a torn Joseph Abboud there, and pretty soon you're talking real money.
        One can only hope that the current restitution program is only the tip of the sartorial iceberg. After all, why should compensation be limited to those victimized by snagging armrests? White trousers destroyed by chewing gum capriciously abandoned on seats, footwear stained beyond repair by overturned coffee containers, lingerie shredded by jagged-edged seats also seem worthy of consideration for compensatory action.
        Authentic fashion victims or counterfeit snaggees like me should be aware that the window of opportunity for haberdasherial restitution is closing fast. The railroad companies have begun conducting focus groups with a view toward replacing the irksome armrests, so the spigot of largess will not flow forever.
        If you've got any expendable dining jackets or out-of-fashion evening gowns that you'd like to unload at a profit, my advice is to book a trip from the suburbs and do it fast. Right now, I'm planning a family snagging expedition with my daughter shredding the dress she wore to her high school prom, my son ripping a gaping hole in a Calvin Klein suit that is now two sizes too big for him and my wife massacring a white parka I have always despised.
        As for me, a 42 long blighted by a closet full of 39 regulars, I could be riding that inbound train every day for the next month. And yes, powers that be, I've kept my receipts.
        Op-Ed Contributor Joe Queenan is the author, most recently, of ''Queenan Country: A Reluctant Anglophile's Pilgrimage to the Mother Country.''
      