
        Ritchie Capital Management, a $2.8 billion hedge fund based in Geneva, Ill., is close to an agreement to sell the assets in its flagship multi-strategy fund for about $1 billion, said a person briefed on the negotiations. Ritchie would continue to manage the assets.
        The deal comes after a year of turmoil for the fund. Two months ago, management presented a restructuring plan to investors in an effort to stave off mass redemptions resulting from poor performance, regulatory investigations and concerns about the value of some of the funds' holdings. Investors approved the plan, which has now been nullified by the potential sale.
        Ritchie was founded in 1997 by A. R. Thane Ritchie, a star tight end and linebacker in college football who nearly made it in the pros. The fund uses a variety of strategies, including investing in small loans to risky companies, reinsurance, private equity and stocks.
        Ritchie's zigzagging performance comes at a time when many multi-strategy hedge funds, buoyed by a year-end rally in stocks, are posting strong returns. The relative value arbitrage index -- a benchmark often used to examine multi-strategy funds -- returned 10.81 percent through November, according to Hedge Fund Research.
        For Ritchie's roughly $750 million multi-strategy fund, returns have lagged that index sharply, with the onshore and offshore funds delivering different performances this year.
        In the first quarter, Ritchie Capital Management L.L.C., the onshore fund, rose 5.23 percent. Through September, returns were down 3.30 percent. Currently the fund is up about 2 percent. The offshore fund had more volatile performance, up 9.31 percent in the first quarter and down more than 5 percent for both the second and third quarters, leaving it down about 2 percent for the year.
        Problems started to arise in 2004. Like some other hedge funds, Ritchie started to gravitate toward private equity investments, which are harder to value and harder to liquidate than stocks.
        In August 2005, investors approved stricter terms for withdrawing money. The new terms included a ''gate'' that prohibited investors from withdrawing more than 10 percent of the fund's assets in any given quarter. Investors also faced revised lockups, or penalties, for withdrawing their money.
        Some investors balked at the changes. They were also concerned about the move into less liquid investments and how they were structured. One issue was the use of so-called side pockets, or investments that are accounted for separately from the fund. Side pockets are legal when they are disclosed, but investors expressed concern when Ritchie moved some of its poorly performing assets into the side pocket, but not others.
        At a securities industry conference in June, Roel C. Campos, a commissioner at the Securities and Exchange Commission, expressed concern about side pockets, suggesting that managers use them to inflate their performance -- and their pay -- by moving poorly performing assets away from the funds. Hedge fund managers generally earn 2 percent of assets under management and 20 percent of profits, so higher profits mean higher pay.
        Ritchie investors were informed of the sale in a letter sent to investors on Tuesday.
        On Wall Street, bankers said the fund had been trying to sell its reinsurance portfolio for more than a month. It appears the sale is separate from the pending sale of the multi-strategy assets, but a spokesman declined to comment on the reinsurance portfolio.
      