
        One week ago, Somalia was on the brink of war, with rival soldiers separated by just a few miles of scratchy desert and rival leaders vowing to crush each other.
        The Islamist clerics who rule Mogadishu had threatened Ethiopia with an ultimatum to pull out its troops -- which are in Somalia to back up the transitional Somali government -- or face a cataclysmic holy war. That ultimatum was supposed to be met by Tuesday.
        But the deadline came and went. The Ethiopian troops, by all accounts, have not budged. And now both sides, the Islamists and the weak transitional government protected by Ethiopian muscle, are backtracking from their earlier war-mongering rhetoric in an indisputable change of tone.
        ''We will not attack,'' said Abdulrahim Ali Modei, the information minister for the Council of Islamic Courts. ''That deadline was just a guide. We are still hoping for peace.''
        Last week, Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, the transitional president, rejected any last-minute negotiations, saying, ''The door to peace talks was closed.'' He blamed the increasingly militant Islamists, who have rapidly expanded their territory, for ruining any chance at reconciliation.
        But on Tuesday, Ali Jama, the information minister for the transitional government, sounded much more receptive.
        ''We won't launch any attacks either,'' Mr. Jama said. ''We will wait to see what the Islamists do.''
        A small skirmish broke out south of Baidoa late Tuesday, Agence France-Presse reported, but no further information was immediately available.
        Since the Islamists came to power in June, Somalia has been caught in an awkward, dangerous vise, with the two rival authorities claiming legitimacy and threatening to annihilate each other.
        One is the internationally recognized transitional government, based in the inland city of Baidoa, and the result of a long, tortuous process to end Somalia's 15 years of clan-driven anarchy. The transitional government enjoys more support outside Somalia than within it, where it is ridiculed for being ineffective and divided. American officials have said that if Ethiopian troops had not come to the government's rescue, it would have fallen long ago.
        The other authority is the Islamic Courts, a network of clan courts that pacified Mogadishu, Somalia's war-weary seaside capital, and then spread across south-central Somalia. Many people in Mogadishu respect the Islamists for bringing stability to what had been one of the most murderous cities on the planet.
        Shortly after the Islamists seized power, Ethiopia began slipping troops across the border to protect Baidoa. According to United Nations officials, the Islamists, in turn, began drawing arms from Eritrea and several Arab countries.
        This month, the two sides began to build up troops around Baidoa, leading to small skirmishes that many analysts feared would explode into a wider regional war. But it seems that they are pausing, possibly checked by the realization that neither can win a decisive victory.
        The Islamists are reluctant to march on Baidoa and set off a crushing Ethiopian response, while the Ethiopians seem fearful of trying to storm the Islamists' stronghold of Mogadishu, a city packed with weapons and militant zeal.
        Eleventh-hour diplomatic efforts may be another factor. The United Nations Security Council, under American pressure, recently passed a resolution authorizing peacekeepers for Somalia and allowing the Baidoa government to import weapons, despite an arms embargo.
        American officials have said they expect the Baidoa government to use this leverage not to attack the Islamists but to force them back to the negotiating table. American officials have also said that they have asked Ethiopia not to react aggressively to provocations, and so far Ethiopia is cooperating.
        Somalia is still a tinderbox, with thousands of young, uneducated men armed with machine guns and experience in using them.
        Residents of Baidoa fear that war will come. ''It's just a matter of time,'' said Adam Ali, a driver in Baidoa. ''The fighting will happen. There's just been a delay.''
      