
        Gov. Jon Corzine has pulled the rug out from under Democratic leaders in the Legislature on property tax reform. Just as the leaders were about to ask their colleagues to cut pension benefits for future public workers, as a way of subsidizing property tax relief, they were told by Mr. Corzine that the issue would instead be handled through collective bargaining.
        Now the pressure is on Mr. Corzine. If he can somehow negotiate a contract with the union next year that contains pension cuts, New Jersey may get genuine property tax relief. If not, it's hard to see how the state can afford much more than modest relief, probably of a temporary nature.
        Despite his business skills, Mr. Corzine's job will not be easy. Collective bargaining involves give and take, and he'll be be pressed to give workers meaningful salary hikes or some other big benefits in exchange for pension concessions.
        The workers have some strong arguments. Since the pension cuts would be aimed at future rather than current employees, they can portray themselves as standing up for the best interests of their successors and even the state. Barbara Keshishian, vice president of the New Jersey Education Association, told a rally of 10,000 public workers in Trenton last week that if benefits are cut, highly qualified young people ''will pass over teaching'' for more lucrative careers. Other speakers blamed the state's fiscal problems on mismanagement by past governors, which is partly true. But a 9 percent increase in public employee pension benefits in 2001 did not help.
        And then there are the taxpayers -- and the promises they were made by Mr. Corzine to reduce their highest-in-the-nation property taxes. Legislators are working on a plan for a 20 percent property tax credit for families making less than $100,000 a year and smaller credits for those making more, but nobody has figured out how to pay for it, especially after the first year.
        Bills to cap property tax increases and start the process for streamlining municipal government and school districts are likely to get enacted, but these alone would not pay for significant tax cuts. If public employee benefits are not going to be touched, deeper and painful cuts would have to be made elsewhere. No one, Mr. Corzine included, has come up with a proposal for doing that.
        It's all up to Mr. Corzine. Now that he has taken over the challenge of cutting public workers' pensions, he has no choice but to be successful.
        New Jersey
      