
        Dr. Robert W. Wissler, a cardiovascular researcher who, with others, discovered that a combination of smoking and high cholesterol in young men could damage arteries earlier and more significantly than previously known, died on Nov. 28 in Chicago. He was 89.
        The cause was respiratory failure, his family said.
        The findings about artery damage resulted from a national study that Dr. Wissler, a professor of pathology at the University of Chicago, helped direct, beginning in 1983. The researchers looked at blood vessels recovered from men, ages 15 to 34, who had died suddenly without evidence of chronic disease.
        The team discovered that fatty streaks, a condition that can lead to arterial plaque, were present in some cases and that smokers were at particular risk of developing lesions on the right coronary artery and the abdominal aorta.
        The study, ''Pathobiological Determinants of Atherosclerosis in Youth,'' was published in The Journal of the American Medical Association in 1990. It was received as ''dramatic documentation of how early cardiovascular disease occurs,'' said Dr. Angelo M. Scanu, a cardiologist who is director of the University of Chicago Hospitals Lipid Clinic.
        The study underscored Dr. Wissler's belief that cardiovascular illness could often be minimized or even prevented by altering a patient's diet. Using laboratory rats and rhesus monkeys, he conducted dietary studies in which he manipulated the animals' nutrition to measure cholesterol levels and their effect on creating or retarding arterial plaque.
        He was also interested in the relationship between nutrition and the function of the immune system.
        Robert William Wissler was born in Richmond, Ind. He attended Earlham College, in Richmond, and earned a medical degree from Chicago. He received his doctorate in pathology, also from Chicago, in 1946.
        Dr. Wissler became an assistant professor of pathology at Chicago in 1947 and remained there for the rest of his career. He was chairman of the department of pathology from 1957 to 1972.
        He was also a former president of the American Association of Pathologists and Bacteriologists and of the American Society for Experimental Pathology. In 1979, he was named president of the American Board of Pathology. He retired in 1987.
        Dr. Wissler is survived by his wife of 66 years, the former Elizabeth Anne Polk. They lived in the Hyde Park section of Chicago.
        He is also survived by a son, John P. Wissler of Round Mountain, Calif.; two daughters, Mary Graham of Washington and Barbara Mayers of Chicago; six grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren.
      