
        Robert N. Anthony, a professor at the Harvard Business School and an influential author who helped make the numbers-crunching of accountants more comprehensible to business executives, died Dec. 1 at his home in Hanover, N.H. He was 90.
        The death was confirmed by his son, Robert Jr.
        A Harvard faculty member from 1940 to 1982, Professor Anthony took a leave from the school in 1965 -- at the request of his friend, Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara -- to serve as the Defense Department comptroller. During a time of disarray over weapons spending, he was credited with bringing accounting among the five military services into alignment. ''He changed the way the Defense Department operated,'' said Charles Christenson, a former deputy in the Air Force financial management office.
        ''There was a substantial cost overrun on the Minuteman missile program,'' said Mr. Christenson, now an accounting professor at Harvard. ''Secretary McNamara wanted procedures to keep that from happening again. Bob made sure all the branches were on the same wavelength.''
        But in the arcane realm of accounting, Professor Anthony is best known for demonstrating how statistics can be used for making better management decisions. Frederick D. S. Choi, chairman of the accounting department at the Stern School of Business at New York University, said that Professor Anthony made the subject ''palatable to the executive suite.''
        ''If you teach accounting as bookkeeping, it's a turnoff,'' Professor Choi said. ''But if you teach it as information for the decision process, which is what he did, it becomes extremely interesting. That's why his books are used by professors around the world.''
        Professor Anthony wrote or had a role in writing 27 books on accounting and management control. In 1973 and 1974, he was president of the American Accounting Association.
        Regina E. Herzlinger, an accounting professor at Harvard, said: ''Through his frameworks and case studies of real companies, Bob helped managers understand how to use the data for evaluating a product, setting a price. It had been intuitive, but he codified it.''
        Robert Newton Anthony was born in Orange, Mass., on Sept. 6, 1916. Besides his son, Robert, of Bethesda, Md., he is survived by his wife of 33 years, Katherine Yeager Anthony; a daughter, Victoria Anthony of Littleton, Mass.; five grandchildren and seven great-grandchildren. His previous marriage, to Gretchen Lynch, ended in divorce.
        Mr. Anthony graduated from Colby College in 1938. He received a master's degree in business administration from Harvard in 1942 and was immediately hired as a research assistant. From 1943 to 1946, he served in the Navy. After returning to Harvard, he earned a Ph.D. in 1952; in 1956, he was promoted to full professor.
        His accounting concepts ranged from the global to the provincial. In a 1970 letter to The New York Times, he proposed that the United States create a tax surcharge to cover damages to the Soviet Union in the event of an accidental American nuclear strike. The tax burden would be ''the smallest consequence of maintaining a nuclear arsenal,'' he wrote. ''An all-out nuclear exchange would probably mean the end of civilization.''
        In the late 1980s, Professor Anthony moved to Waterville Valley, N.H., where for 10 years he was the town's elected auditor. ''I got 24 votes last year; that's all there were,'' he once said.
      