
        Somebody in the Giants' offices apparently thought a video from a ''Rocky'' movie would be a fun putdown of the Eagles. Instead, it was an omen.
        Up on the Giants Stadium scoreboards between the first and second quarters, with the score 7-7 yesterday, Rocky Balboa, the pugilistic pride of Philadelphia, was being battered by Clubber Lang in a cut from ''Rocky III.'' It was a prelude, the Giants hoped, to the Eagles being battered. Not that many of the Eagles even noticed it, although guard Todd Herremans did.
        ''In all those movies, Rocky winds up winning anyway,'' Herremans said after the Eagles wound up winning, 36-22. ''I don't know what they were trying to say there.''
        Up on the scoreboards between the third and fourth quarters, with the Eagles leading, 14-13, there was a cut from ''Rocky IV,'' with Sylvester Stallone staring at a Russian heavyweight. But it ended before anyone threw a punch, much less before the Eagles knocked out the Giants in, pardon the boxing lingo, 10 seconds.
        With 2 minutes 57 seconds remaining, quarterback Jeff Garcia and wide receiver Reggie Brown collaborated on a 19-yard touchdown pass. Ten seconds later, defensive end Trent Cole pranced into the end zone with an interception of a wobbly pass at the 19-yard line after cornerback Sheldon Brown bumped Eli Manning's arm.
        Just like Rocky, the Eagles had come off the floor to win.
        ''I was happy to see Rocky up there on the screen,'' said Dhani Jones, a former Giants linebacker. ''They brought Philadelphia to New York.''
        To the Giants' eventual dismay. They are 7-7, and the Eagles moved to 8-6 and would take the National Football Conference East lead with a victory at Dallas on Christmas Day. That would put the Eagles and the Cowboys each at 9-6, but with a sweep of the divisional rivalry, the Eagles would hold the tie breaker going into the season finales, both at home -- the Eagles against Atlanta, the Cowboys against Detroit.
        As for the Giants, they remain alive, temporarily sharing the sixth seeding and last N.F.C. wild card with the Falcons, each at 7-7.
        If the Giants defeat the Saints, who visit Giants Stadium next Sunday, and win their season finale at Washington for a 9-7 record, they would qualify for the playoffs even if the Falcons, who go to Carolina next Sunday, finish at 9-7, thanks to the Giants' early season victory in Atlanta.
        In the big picture, the Giants have lost five of their past six games, although they played solidly a week ago in winning at Carolina and rallied yesterday to lead, 22-21, with some seven minutes remaining before the Eagles' 10-second knockout.
        Manning was mostly sharp, completing 28 of 40 passes for 282 yards, but when the Giants got to the Eagles' 5-yard line late in the third quarter, then to their 6 early in the fourth, they had to settle for Jay Feely's field goals of 23 and 24 yards. Against a tough defense like the Eagles, you can't waste those touchdown opportunities.
        Tiki Barber was hardly insignificant, rushing for 75 yards on 19 carries and catching five passes for 29 yards, but Eagles running back Brian Westbrook outdid him. Westbrook had 19 carries for 97 rushing yards, including touchdown runs of 28 yards and 1 yard. He also had five receptions for 40 yards.
        When the Eagles lost their longtime quarterback Donovan McNabb with a knee injury, many pro football critics wrote them off as a playoff contender. But with the 36-year-old Jeff Garcia, a three-time Pro Bowl quarterback with the 49ers, inserted as the starter, the Eagles are 3-1 and suddenly challenging the Cowboys for the division title.
        The Giants knew all about Garcia, the 49ers' quarterback when the 2002 Giants lost a wild-card playoff game in San Francisco, 39-38, after having held a 38-14 lead with 18 minutes left.
        In that haunting game, when the Giants botched Matt Bryant's 41-yard field-goal try in the final seconds, Garcia hit 27 of 44 passes for 331 yards and 3 touchdowns, including the decisive 13-yard pass to Tai Streets with one minute left. Terrell Owens, then with 49ers, caught two touchdown passes.
        But now Garcia is in Philadelphia and Owens is in Dallas, where they will be opponents next Monday for the N.F.C. East lead. The Giants, meanwhile, know they must find a way to outscore the Saints, N.F.C. South champions at 9-5, who will be coming off an embarrassing loss to the Redskins.
        ''That's the way this league is right now,'' said Andy Reid, the Eagles' coach. ''It's crazy.''
        And in talking about the Giants-Eagles rivalry that goes back to 1931, Reid had the correct phrase to fit yesterday's game.
        ''It's knock down, dragout,'' he said.
        Actually, a 10-second knockout. Just like Rocky.
        SPORTS OF THE TIMES
      