
        The Romanian president, Traian Basescu, on Monday formally condemned the Communist dictatorship that ruled his country for more than four decades, the first time a Romanian head of state had officially denounced the Soviet-era system.
        ''The regime exterminated people by assassination and deportation of hundreds of thousands of people,'' Mr. Basescu told Parliament. He based his assessment on a 660-page report compiled by a presidential commission charged with analyzing the country's Communist past.
        The move, coming less than two weeks before Romania joins the European Union, represented a belated attempt by the country to make a more complete break with the Communist period than was possible in the managed revolution of 1989. After Communist authority weakened in Moscow, many of the region's Communist officials simply changed hats and continued to participate in government when authoritarian one-party governments remade themselves, largely unchallenged, into independent free-market democracies.
        When Romania's last Communist-era dictator, Nicolae Ceausescu, was overthrown and executed in 1989, he was replaced by a coalition of former Communist Party officials under the banner of the National Salvation Front.
        Some other former Soviet-bloc states have already condemned their Communist pasts. In July 1993, the Czech Republic passed an act condemning its Soviet-era government, and the Bulgarian Parliament passed a resolution in 2001 condemning the former government there. Last month, Ukrainian Parliament passed a bill labeling the Stalin-orchestrated famine that killed an estimated 10 million people in the 1930s an act of genocide.
        ''It is as important as the condemnation of National Socialism after the end of World War II,'' said Plamen Tzvetkov, a professor of history at New Bulgarian University in Sofia.
        In many of the formerly Communist countries, the transgressions of the authoritarian past were never fully explored and the systems that made them possible were never completely condemned. Romania and Bulgaria were among the most recalcitrant.
        Earlier this year, the Council of Europe's parliamentary assembly passed a resolution condemning the region's former Communist governments and called on all of the former Communist states ''to reassess the history of Communism'' and condemn the governments ''without any ambiguity.''
        As a result, Mr. Basescu was under increasing pressure from civil society and the European Union to condemn Romania's Communist-era government, one of the most repressive in the region. He was reluctant to do so without an authoritative report to back up his criticism.
        In late March, he formed the Commission for the Analysis of the Communist Dictatorship with young historians, psychologists and anthropologists to provide him with such a report. He appointed Vladimir Tismaneanu, a University of Maryland professor, to head the effort.
        The work was not without its challenges because much of the Communist-era ruling elite remained embedded in Romania's structures of power. The commission met silence from some government agencies and resistance from others. One of the commission members resigned, admitting that he had been a Communist informer.
        The final report is long and occasionally lurid. One chapter recounts the chilling Pitesti experiment, in which young political prisoners were systematically tortured and subjected to brainwashing techniques by other prisoners in order to destroy their sense of self and replace it with loyalty to the state.
        The report charges the Communist authorities with crimes against humanity and puts responsibility for the misdeeds primarily on the party and its secret service, the Securitate.
        ''There's a lot of information in the report, woven together to make the indictment of Communism quite powerful,'' Mr. Tismaneanu said.
        Former President Ion Iliescu, who dominated Romania's post-Communist political scene and is now honorary president of the Social Democratic Party, is mentioned in the report as an important ideologue of the Communist Party. He served as the head of the Department of Propaganda of the Central Committee.
        On Monday, he accused Mr. Basescu of ''McCarthyism'' and ''politicizing history'' and trying to demonize the democratic left. The Social Democratic Party has adopted a resolution condemning the report.
        While some lawmakers applauded Mr. Basescu's remarks, others sat in silence.
        ''The Communist regime was illegitimate and criminal,'' Mr. Basescu said. ''It treated an entire population as a group of guinea pigs for an experiment.''
      