
        The young quarterback Tony Romo showed that he could keep his cool and bounce back from adversity.
        The star receiver Terrell Owens, on the other hand, once again showed his ability to create controversy.
        Romo entered the Cowboys' game Saturday night against the Atlanta Falcons trying to bounce back from his first discouraging game since becoming the starter. He struggled on Dallas's first possession but rebounded to complete 22 of 29 passes for 278 yards and 2 touchdowns as the Cowboys won, 38-28.
        Both touchdown passes were thrown to Owens, who took advantage of Atlanta's DeAngelo Hall. After the game, Hall, a Pro Bowl cornerback, said that Owens had spit in his face.
        ''He had a couple of nice catches,'' Hall said. ''You expect that. He's a great player. Right before the first punt, though, we kind of got in each other's face, talking back and forth, and I lost all respect for him when he spit in my face.''
        Owens, who finished with five catches for 69 yards, acknowledged that he lost his composure.
        ''I got frustrated, and I apologize for that,'' Owens told the NFL Network. ''It was a situation where he kept bugging me and getting in my face.''
        Romo spread the ball to six receivers with passes from sideline to sideline as Dallas improved to 9-5 and took control of the National Football Conference East .
        The Cowboys clinched a playoff berth Sunday when the Minnesota Vikings lost to the Jets, 26-13, and the Carolina Panthers lost to the Pittsburgh Steelers, 37-3.
        There was some speculation before the game about how Romo would handle the situation.
        Would Romo's confidence be shaken, or could he shrug and consider his poor performance in a 42-17 loss to the New Orleans Saints last week merely a hiccup?
        The game with the Falcons was seen as a test of Romo's ability to bounce back, and it did not start well. Romo missed on a deep pass to Owens on Dallas's first play from scrimmage.
        On the second snap, he was overeager and pulled away from center without the ball, resulting in a fumble he scrambled to recover.
        The possession ended with Romo being sacked and the Cowboys forced to punt.
        On the second Dallas possession, no one had to ask if Romo's confidence was still bruised. He took the Cowboys on an 11-play, 66-yard drive, completing 6 of 6 passes as Dallas took a 7-0 lead.
        While others may see it as a step toward being a longtime starter in the N.F.L., Romo takes nothing for granted at this stage of his career.
        ''Until you prove to them over an extended period of time, or until you prove to them in the playoffs or in a big situation a bunch of times, everyone is going to question what type of player you really are,'' Romo said.
        The Cowboys, who are on the short end of most of the key tie breakers in the N.F.C. East, have less worry about their quarterback, as well as less worry about their postseason plans. Their win against Atlanta let them maintain their one-game lead in the East over the Philadelphia Eagles, who beat the Giants on Sunday, 36-22.
        Dallas, which has won five of six, plays host to Philadelphia on Dec. 25 with a chance to clinch the division title.
        The 26-year-old Romo, who is 6-2 as a starter this season, is certainly a big factor in the Cowboys' improvement from a 3-3 team under the former starting quarterback Drew Bledsoe to a Super Bowl contender. The offense, with above-average receivers in Terry Glenn, Owens and Jason Witten; dependable running backs in Julius Jones and Marion Barber III; and a solid line, is one of the N.F.L.'s top scoring units.
        Dallas is scoring 27 points a game. The Cowboys are outscoring opponents by 135-65 in the fourth quarter.
        Of course, there was barely a shrug after Romo's performance from Coach Bill Parcells, whose anointing oil, as he puts it, is probably surrendered only on Hall of Fame induction day.
        ''I thought his performance was better than the week before,'' was all Parcells would say.
        PRO FOOTBALL
      