
        Q. Can I buy a ready-made house plan by a well-known architect?
        A. You can buy an Armani suit off the rack, so why not a Frank Gehry house?
        Unfortunately, it rarely works that way. You can get books thick with generic blueprints, and you can find thousands more at Web sites like eplans.com or garrellassociates.com. But plans by famous architects are hard to come by without actually hiring their designers to create a custom home. And most of us can't afford that.
        ''There's a great middle ground between high-end commissions and cookie-cutter housing that is hankering for good design,'' said Russell Versaci, an architect based in Middleburg, Va., who until a few years ago sold plans for classic country houses online and now markets them as kit homes. ''There are a lot of smart, savvy people out there who want to buy design in a practical way.''
        Frank Lloyd Wright had this in mind in 1938, when Life magazine published his plans for a low-cost, low-slung ''dream home'' designed for a typical American family (income: $5,000 to $6,000) moving to the new American suburbs. Life did not sell the plans, but it did sell a cardboard model of the home for a dollar to aspiring homeowners.
        Sixty-eight years later, some of Wright's construction drawings are finally available to buy. Within the last two years, the Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation in Scottsdale, Ariz., has begun selling the roughly 200 unbuilt designs from its archive. (Information is available at 480-860-2700.) The foundation charges $5,000 for a one-day consultation with its archivists, plus 8 percent of construction costs.
        The terms are not just monetary: the foundation retains the right to make all design decisions when the plans are modified to conform to today's materials and code requirements. ''We need to make sure it's as faithful a representation of the original as possible,'' said Philip Allsopp, president of the foundation. So far only one design from the archive has been built, Mr. Allsopp said, and another is in construction.
        In the 1990's, Life revived the dream home project with designs by Robert A. M. Stern, Michael Graves (his 1996 design is shown above) and four other established architecture firms. ''I told the editors that most Americans don't buy the house they want, they buy the house that's available,'' Mr. Stern said.
        With that in mind, the magazine sold the plans to readers, with Mr. Stern's five-bedroom house emerging as the best seller. The Life plans are now available through Southern Living magazine (prices range from $985 to $1,375 for complete drawings), along with more than 800 other house plans. (For information: slhouseplans.com.)
        Dennis Wedlick, who designed the 1995 dream house for Life, said he believes there is an untapped market for a superior class of stock plans, and that he would consider selling a portfolio of off-the-rack drawings, if he knew they would be altered to suit the appropriate climate and location by a local architect.
        ''We all know how horrible it can end up being if you simply pick a plan out of a catalog and plop it down on a site,'' he said. ''You need that professional advice.''
      