
        The largest gold mining company in Russia, Polyus, listed shares on the London Stock Exchange on Monday, three weeks after a market scare in London over speculation that the Kremlin had begun a program to nationalize Siberia's gold fields.
        Shares in Polyus closed at $48.90 Monday. Trading was thin despite the easing of concerns after Russian authorities issued a clarification last week.
        Polyus operates mines and alluvial gold fields in Siberia. Though the stock was making its debut on the London exchange, the listing was not technically an initial public offering; Polyus shares already traded as American depository receipts in the over-the-counter market in the United States.
        Denis Davydov, head of investor relations for Polyus, said the listing would bolster the stock's value by making it available to a wider audience. ''This means more liquidity and more exposure,'' he said in a telephone interview from London Monday.
        Still, as with so much else in Russia's booming commodities industry, the listing became a precarious calculation of political risk and financial reward, a decision made more difficult by unfortunate timing.
        After months of preparation, Polyus listed about three weeks after Oleg Mitvol, deputy head of Russia's environmental regulator, had threatened to revoke licenses held by Peter Hambro Mining, a separate London-listed gold mining company. That prompted market rumors that the Kremlin was preparing to nationalize the gold fields.
        Peter Hambro's stock fell almost 14 percent in London on Nov. 29, after Mr. Mitvol said he had found violations of the company's gold field licenses. The shares rebounded last week when he backpedaled on those comments, saying the primary operating mine was not at risk of closure, and met with the company's chief executive.
        ''It does increase the discount the London market will apply to Russian businesses,'' Alya Samokhvalova, a spokeswoman for Peter Hambro, said in a telephone interview.
        Russia is attractive to gold investors because it is believed to have large undiscovered reserves -- the age-old dream of striking gold does not always disappoint.
        ''Russia's gold resource base is underexplored,'' said Sergey M. Donskoy, a metals analyst at the Troika Dialog investment bank in Moscow. ''Through exploration you can develop a portfolio of reserves. You may or may not be successful. It depends on your skill, and your luck.''
        Polyus listed the shares as the final step in a complicated deal to spin off the precious metals arm of the Arctic metals giant Norilsk Nickel, controlled by the oligarch Vladimir O. Potanin. Norilsk is the world's largest producer of nickel, an important alloy of steel. The strategy was to elevate the value of its overlooked gold assets.
        Polyus produced a million troy ounces of gold last year. It is believed to be a contender to mine Sukhoi Log, a gold lode north of Lake Baikal in southern Siberia. Russia is the fifth-largest gold-producing nation after South Africa, the United States, Australia and China.
      