
        A Russian government agency said Thursday that it would test several passenger airplanes for traces of the radioactive isotope that killed Alexander V. Litvinenko last month in London, but officials at the state-controlled airline, Aeroflot, said the agency had told them there would be no inspections.
        The contradictory, perhaps confused, statements underscored the uncertain response of the Russian authorities in a murder case that the victim, without direct evidence, laid at the feet of President Vladimir V. Putin and the country's secretive security services.
        Mr. Litvinenko, a former K.G.B. officer, had fled Russia and became a fierce critic of Mr. Putin's Kremlin.
        The request for the tests came from investigators in Germany who are trying to learn how a Russian businessman came to leave traces of the radioactive material, polonium 210, at sites around Hamburg in the days before he flew to London and met Mr. Litvinenko on Nov. 1. Mr. Litvinenko fell ill that day and died of radiation poisoning on Nov. 23.
        The director of the agency, which oversees consumer safety protection and is known as Rospotrebnadzor, appeared to contradict statements by Aeroflot officials that the inspections had been called off.
        ''We have just been informed that Rospotrebnadzor canceled their inspection of our planes,'' a spokeswoman for Aeroflot, Irina Dannenberg, said in a telephone interview.
        The Interfax news agency later reported that all Aeroflot planes that had flown to Hamburg in October -- as many as 20 -- were already being tested, citing the agency's director, Gennadi G. Onishchenko.
        ''Rospotrebnadzor is now sorting this out,'' he said. ''I gave an order.''
        The authorities in Germany are investigating the Russian businessman, Dmitri V. Kovtun, on suspicion that he handled the polonium during his visit to Hamburg.
        The police there have not identified him as a suspect in Mr. Litvinenko's murder. But investigators said Mr. Kovtun might have carried polonium with him during his four days in Hamburg.
        Mr. Kovtun, now reportedly in a Moscow hospital being treated for radiation exposure, left a trail of radioactive traces in several places. Among them was the sofa in his ex-wife's Hamburg apartment and the car he rode in from the airport after arriving from Moscow aboard an Aeroflot flight on Oct. 28.
        It is not clear why the Russian agency would inspect so many aircraft instead of simply the one that made that flight.
        Officials here have vowed to cooperate with British and German investigators trying to solve the killing of Mr. Litvinenko. But there have been doubts about the sincerity of their pledge.
        The police in Hamburg said they thought they would have a chance to inspect the plane in question, a Russian-made Ilyushin, last Sunday when it flew its normal route from Moscow to Hamburg.
        But on Sunday, Aeroflot used an Airbus plane, which a spokeswoman for the police, Ulrike Sweden, said aroused suspicions that the airline had switched planes to head off a search. She acknowledged, though, that it was also possible that Aeroflot routinely switched the planes it used.
        Ms. Sweden said that for the first two days of their investigation, on Sunday and Monday, the German authorities tried in vain to contact the Russian authorities through their police liaison office in Moscow.
        So on Tuesday, she said, the state prosecutor filed a formal request for help through the German Justice Ministry.
        The German authorities are now playing down the need to inspect the plane, saying the request had been made for public safety reasons after the police first detected traces of polonium 210 in a BMW and several houses in Hamburg where Mr. Kovtun had been. ''Since we know now that the contamination is not as bad as we expected, there's no immediate danger,'' Ms. Sweden said.
        Aleksandr N. Vasilyev, a spokesman for the prosecutors here, said his office had no information about the request from the Germans to check the Aeroflot planes. Had there been a request addressed to that office, he said, ''it would have been a request on legal assistance on the Litvinenko case, which may also include checking the planes.'' But he said that ''as of today's early afternoon no such request was filed.''
        Last week, in another eyebrow-raising move here, the Prosecutor General's Office announced that it had opened its own criminal investigation, calling Mr. Kovtun's exposure a case of attempted murder.
        A team of British detectives joined Russian investigators in interviews with Mr. Kovtun last week and with another Russian businessman who was at their Nov. 1 meeting, Andrei K. Lugovoi, this week. Their interviews are continuing.
        Mr. Lugovoi and Mr. Kovtun suggested in remarks published this week that they believed that Mr. Litvinenko might have been poisoned earlier in October and then contaminated them. That, they said, would explain how Mr. Kovtun could have left traces of the material in Germany before flying to London on Nov. 1.
        Mr. Lugovoi told the newspaper Moskovsky Komsomolets that he and Mr. Kovtun met Mr. Litvinenko at the office of a security company in London on Oct. 16. Mr. Kovtun, according to prosecutors, has symptoms of radiation poisoning, though how serious they are is still unclear. No results of Mr. Lugovoi's tests for exposure have been made public.
        A British government scientist said this week that with the high level of polonium 210 present in Mr. Litvinenko's body, he could not have survived from mid-October to Nov. 1, as the two Russians suggested.
      