
        The NFL Network has offered Time Warner and Cablevision an opportunity for their New York-New Jersey subscribers to see Rutgers play Kansas State in the Texas Bowl on Dec. 28 if they accept the network's weeklong free preview.
        Yesterday, Time Warner and Cablevision -- with about 4.5 million customers in the local market -- did not show enthusiasm for the offer. Cablevision's response showed that it did not want to give the channel much exposure.
        Cablevision said it expected to carry only the pregame programming before the Texas Bowl, the game and any postgame coverage, not the full week from Dec. 24 to Dec. 30. It would be available to Cablevision's Family Cable customers on Channel 14.
        In doing so, Cablevision would eliminate the NFL Network's hope of showing the breadth of its programming to customers who had not seen it and might demand it from Time Warner and Cablevision.
        Maureen Huff, a Time Warner spokeswoman, said, ''We just received the proposal and are looking at it.'' She declined to say whether Time Warner was considering the same limited response as Cablevision.
        League spokesmen refused to comment on whether Cablevision's response violated the terms of the weeklong offer. ''We will review their full response,'' said Joe Browne, a spokesman.
        Time Warner and Cablevision have refused to carry the NFL Network, at a monthly subscriber fee of 70 cents, on a broadly available tier like expanded basic.
        The free preview, a common marketing tool in cable, especially for movie channels, was offered by Roger Goodell, the commissioner of the National Football League, during a telephone conversation yesterday with Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey. The league has received several hundred phone calls from fans who want to see the Rutgers-Kansas State bowl game.
        Lautenberg has been lobbying the league to broaden the coverage of the Texas Bowl ever since it appeared possible that Rutgers would play in it. ''The bottom line is that people in New Jersey need to be able to watch Rutgers play, and now we have a way to do that,'' Lautenberg said in a statement.
        The league chose to provide the free preview rather than license the game to local broadcast stations in the New York-New Jersey or Manhattan, Kan., areas, or stream it to broadband Internet users on NFL.com.
        ANOTHER HONOR FOR SCHIANO -- Rutgers Coach Greg Schiano was named the Walter Camp Football Foundation 2006 Coach of the Year yesterday. The Scarlet Knights (10-2) reached 10 victories for only the second time in the team's 137-year history. Rutgers also earned its first national top-10 ranking.
        Schiano is the second Rutgers coach and the first Big East Conference coach since 1999 to earn the honor.
        He has been coach for six years and also serves as defensive coordinator. The Scarlet Knights rank seventh nationally in scoring defense (14.7 points allowed a game) and ninth in total defense (259.7 yards allowed a game.)
        Schiano has taken Rutgers to consecutive bowl berths and led the team to a 17-7 record the last two seasons. He was recently recognized as the 2006 Big East coach of the year and the Home Depot national coach of the year.
        The Walter Camp recipient is voted by the nation's 119 Division I-A coaches and sports information directors.
        Schiano; Ohio State's Troy Smith, who was named player of the year; and the members of the 2006 Walter Camp All-American team will be honored Jan. 13 at a dinner at the Yale University Commons in New Haven. (AP)
        COLLEGES
      