
        Pump-and-dump schemes in the stock market are an old way of making money from gullible investors, but they require persuading the investor to buy an overpriced stock.
        A Russian trader, operating through an Estonian brokerage firm, found a simpler way to pump and dump stocks, the Securities and Exchange Commission said yesterday.
        The S.E.C. said that the trader, Evgeny Gashichev, who was trading though an account of Grand Logistic, a Belize corporation based in Estonia, used the Internet to steal passwords of account holders at online brokerage firms, among them E*Trade Securities, TD Ameritrade and Scottrade.
        The commission said Mr. Gashichev would buy, through his own account, shares in a thinly traded company. Immediately after that, he would use the accounts of victims to buy large quantities of the stock, driving up the price. He would then sell his shares into that demand. In some cases, he would then sell the stock short, profiting further when the price declined.
        The S.E.C. complaint said that Mr. Gashichev ''initially funded the Grand Logistic account with $30,000, and, in approximately seven weeks, realized $353,609 in profits from his fraudulent scheme.'' It said the trades, from Aug. 28 through Oct. 13, were in 21 securities.
        Daniel M. Hawke, administrator of the S.E.C. district office in Philadelphia, said: ''The S.E.C. has become aware of a dramatic increase in the number of intrusions into online brokerage accounts. We have been working closely with other regulators and brokerage firms in an effort to ensure that online brokerage trading is safe and secure.''
        He added that ''brokerage firms are typically covering the intrusion-related losses of their customers.''
        The commission said a federal judge in New York barred taking the profits from the trades out of the United States, and ordered repatriation of the money already taken.
        Amy J. Greer, an S.E.C. lawyer, said in an interview that the money had been sent to Estonia, but that authorities there had frozen the account. ''The Estonian authorities have been very cooperative,'' she said.
      