
        Responding to criticism that regulators had overreacted to years of major corporate scandals, the Securities and Exchange Commission on Wednesday issued a flurry of deregulatory orders and proposals intended to lower costs to public companies. It said the moves would not reduce investor protection.
        In a daylong proceeding, the commission proposed a loose interpretation for smaller companies of an auditing provision of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 that has come under attack from many companies.
        It also proposed a rule to make it easier for foreign companies to withdraw their securities from American markets. A number of companies have asked to withdraw, and officials said the current rules discouraged companies from listing on United States exchanges if they did not have the option of withdrawing later.
        ''We hope these proposals, when combined, will make the U.S. markets more attractive and we will get more companies here,'' said John W. White, director of the commission's division of corporation finance.
        Among other noteworthy proposals the S.E.C. issued was one that would increase the financial qualifications for investors in hedge funds, to a net worth of $2.5 million from the current standard of $1 million. Officials said the proposal had the effect of adjusting the original rule for inflation, just as hedge funds are becoming more popular among some less wealthy people. The agency also proposed a new provision on fraud to protect hedge fund investors.
        Some officials said the two proposals could blunt attempts to impose other tougher regulations or disclosure requirements on hedge funds. Six months ago, a federal appeals court said the commission exceeded its authority when it tried to force hedge fund managers to register with it.
        The S.E.C. also adopted a rule that would save corporations the expense of mailing financial reports and proxy statements by enabling them to communicate with the vast majority of their investors through the Internet. (Investors can continue to receive paper copies of proxies and other material through the mail if they request them.)
        And it proposed rules that would make it easier and less costly for banks to offer brokerage services.
        Taken together, the proposals and rules are expected to provide enormous savings for public companies and Wall Street investment houses. Senior officials at the commission said the proposals and rules would not reduce the regulatory protections already afforded to investors.
        The S.E.C.'s deregulatory push came a day after the Justice Department, in response to similar complaints, imposed new limits on federal prosecutors in white-collar corruption cases. Under those new guidelines, prosecutors in the field will now have to obtain permission from senior officials before trying to get companies that are under investigation to waive their attorney-client privilege.
        In weighing whether to seek the indictment of a company, the prosecutors will also no longer be permitted to consider whether the company is paying the legal fees of an employee involved in the inquiry.
        In recent weeks, Bush administration officials and business groups have criticized some of the changes in corporate law, securities rules and criminal procedures that were enacted in the wake of accounting frauds five years ago at Enron, WorldCom and other highflying companies.
        It remains to be seen whether the decisions by the commission and the Justice Department will take political pressure off Congress to go further, or whether the business groups that have been critical of the S.E.C. rules and the Justice Department's approach will be able to persuade lawmakers to retrench further.
        The commission's votes on all the measures Wednesday were unanimous, testimony to both the changed regulatory climate and the political skills of the agency's chairman, Christopher Cox, a former Republican member of Congress. He tailored the changes to avoid the divisiveness that had troubled the tenure of his predecessor.
        Mr. Cox said the unifying theme of the proposals and the new rules was to increase the competitiveness and transparency of companies and markets.
        ''If America's markets aren't competitive, investors lose,'' he said. ''If America's markets are not transparent and open, investors lose.''
        Like the decision at the Justice Department, the changes announced by the commission on Wednesday fell short of what some companies and groups had sought. In the case of the auditing rules, for instance, many businesses had sought an exemption from the requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. That provision requires public companies to assess the controls they have put in place to ensure that their financial reports are reliable.
        Instead of a blanket exemption, officials said, the proposed guidance would give many small companies a powerful new tool in restricting their auditors from engaging in what the executives viewed as expensive and unnecessary audits of financial controls that had minimum impact on financial statements. A companion new auditing standard is to be proposed next week by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board.
        Under the guidance proposed by the S.E.C., executives would evaluate the design of only those financial controls that might carry the risk of having a material impact on financial statements. Commission officials emphasized that the guidance is being drafted to be less onerous on smaller or less intricate companies.
        ''Companies of all sizes and complexities will be able to conduct their evaluations more effectively and efficiently by following the proposed guidance,'' Mr. Cox said. ''As smaller companies have less complex internal control systems than larger companies, this approach enables smaller companies, in particular, to scale and tailor their evaluation methods and procedures to fit their own facts and circumstances.''
      