
        While the football world waits for quarterback Eli Manning to be spectacular, he and the Giants will settle for smart.
        Manning would rather have a game with no interceptions than one with three touchdowns. Against the Carolina Panthers on Sunday, he had both. There was little doubt which statistic was more important to him.
        Manning has played consecutive games without throwing an interception for the first time this season, and only the second time in his three-year N.F.L. career.
        ''I continue to play smart,'' he said after a 27-13 victory over Carolina. ''That's going to be my deal.''
        Interceptions are probably a quarterback's most vital statistic, more so than completion percentage or passer rating or touchdown passes. The teams with the truest hopes for a championship have quarterbacks who make few dumb mistakes among a game's worth of wise decisions. Championships are usually won by those teams with the mentality of an accountant, not a swashbuckler.
        In Chicago, the Bears lead the conference in victories but cannot escape a quarterback debate because Rex Grossman has a propensity for throwing the ball to the other team. Similar concerns have created quarterback shuffles or controversies for teams with high aspirations and veteran quarterbacks, like the Denver Broncos, the Dallas Cowboys and the Carolina Panthers.
        Manning personifies the relationship between bad throws and team performance. The Giants are 7-6. Of Manning's 15 interceptions, 10 came in six losses, and 5 came in victories. During the Giants' recent four-game losing streak, Manning threw six interceptions.
        Such a correlation is no revelation, but it underscores a primary tenet of Coach Tom Coughlin.
        ''The No. 1 stat, of course, is points for and points against,'' Coughlin said during a conference call yesterday. ''But No. 2 is turnovers.''
        The Giants have 21 of them. One was a fumble on an interception return. Of the 20 turnovers by the Giants' offense, 15 were interceptions thrown by Manning, and 2 others were fumbles by him.
        Keep Manning from making turnovers and the Giants like their playoff prospects.
        The Giants have a plus-3 turnover differential (takeaways minus giveaways), tied for 10th in the N.F.L. The nine teams ahead of them include most of the league powers. They have a combined 85-45 record; of those teams, only the St. Louis Rams have a losing mark.
        Conversely, of the 15 teams with a negative turnover ratio, 12 have losing records.
        Along with Manning's erratic play in recent weeks, Coughlin assesses Manning's performance in terms of game management -- coach-speak for playing with few glaring errors -- rather than touchdowns. Coughlin is more concerned with limiting the negative than accentuating the positive.
        The philosophy has rubbed off on Manning, who does not reflect on his effectiveness by assessing completion rates, yards or touchdowns, but mistakes. The first question he received from a reporter after Sunday's victory was about the performance of the offense.
        ''We were able to play smart on offense,'' Manning said. ''No turnovers.''
        That is just what Coughlin wants to hear.
        ''We pound on that so much,'' Coughlin said yesterday, ''that I'm sure that Eli is expressing a very good feeling postgame at not having had a turnover.''
        The Giants may not be good enough to surge toward the playoffs with an automaton at quarterback, but they are certainly not good enough to overcome a spate of Manning mistakes. They showed that during their losing streak.
        ''Obviously, we have to make some plays and I have to continue to protect the ball,'' Manning said. ''I can't force it, can't have stupid turnovers. We're going to be able to run the ball and make enough big plays to win the game.''
        Manning has mostly struggled when he is faced with a strong pass rush, sometimes forcing passes into tight coverage or standing in the pocket and throwing the ball as he leans away from pressure.
        Against the Panthers, he rolled out of the pocket more than usual. He made a key first down with a run up the middle and threw a number of passes away when he found no receiver open.
        ''Just because there's a rush doesn't mean you have to try to force it or throw it up,'' Manning said. He could have been talking to himself in front of a mirror.
        ''You're going to have to take some sacks, you're going to have to throw the ball away or get out of the pocket sometimes,'' he added. ''It's just a matter of continuing to play smart every play.''
        Not spectacular. Just smart.
        EXTRA POINTS
        The Giants trail Dallas (8-5) by a game in the National Football Conference East, but they hold the tie-breaker advantage over the Cowboys. A division title would ensure at least one playoff game at home. Earning one of the conference's top two seedings would provide a first-round bye.  Defensive end Michael Strahan (sprained foot) was expected to miss about four weeks, but he has missed five. The Giants do not expect him back this week.
        Tom Coughlin was largely unconcerned about the inability of the offense to move the ball for much of the second half against the Panthers, as the Giants conservatively nursed a double-digit lead. ''I wasn't going to do anything that was going to create momentum for them,'' Coughlin said. ''I don't necessarily like to play that way. But remember, the object is to win, and I felt that the best way for us to go ahead and win was to, first of all, try to control field position, not turn the ball over, not give them momentum, not give them the ball in any kind of short area to score, but rather to make them drive.''
        FOOTBALL
      