
        To the Editor:
        ''The Future of Indian Point'' (editorial, Dec. 3) urges individuals, communities and governments to weigh the risks, conveniences and costs of the Indian Point nuclear plant's application to renew its operating license for 20 more years.
        One of the best ways to do so would be a safety review of Indian Point by truly independent nuclear experts not beholden to the nuclear industry. Bills are being considered in Congress that would mandate just that. Only with the facts -- uncolored by bias -- may we weigh our options and make well-reasoned decisions on the renewal application.
        One problem: Entergy Nuclear Northeast, the operator of Indian Point, and the industry-laden Nuclear Regulatory Commission have opposed attempts to conduct an independent safety assessment and allow citizens and governments to balance the risks and benefits meaningfully and objectively.
        Glenn Rickles  Croton-on-Hudson
        To the Editor:
        You suggest that the relicensing process will give us an opportunity to debate publicly all the nuclear plant's issues.
        But the Nuclear Regulatory Commission has denied the petition by County Executive Andrew J. Spano requesting improvements in the relicensing process. Therefore, the following will not be taken into account: population growth, emergency planning, technology changes in the industry, a comprehensive review of plant components.
        The flawed emergency plan at Indian Point, the No. 1 concern of the general public, won't even be on the table. Nor will security or nuclear waste concerns.
        Judy Allen  Putnam Valley
        To the Editor:
        The future at Indian Point needs to be bright, or the region will have lost a major energy supply as well as a means to avoid generating greenhouse gases and pollution.
        There will always be population centers of some sort near industrial facilities, including nuclear plants, and the risk of this proximity must be evaluated. This is precisely what the Nuclear Regulatory Commission relies on to make decisions about license renewals and the adequacy of safeguards at nuclear plants, and the risk is very low.
        In fact, the inevitable replacement of Indian Point with fossil-fuel burning power sources would guarantee additional deaths and illnesses every year from the resulting air pollution.
        Unlike an old car, an older nuclear plant has to keep proving it is road-worthy. So there is no reason Indian Point cannot run safely for decades to come.
        William H. Miller  Columbia, Mo.
        The writers is a professor at the Nuclear Science and Engineering Institute, University of Missouri.
      