
        Sandee Brawarsky and Barry E. Lichtenberg are to be married today by Rabbi Saul J. Berman at Congregation B'nai Jeshurun in Manhattan. Rabbi J. Rolando Matalon will take part in the ceremony.
        Ms. Brawarsky, 50, is keeping her name. She is a freelance writer and the book critic for The Jewish Week, a newspaper in Manhattan. She also wrote ''212 Views of Central Park: Experiencing New York City's Jewel From Every Angle,'' on which she collaborated with photographer Mick Hales (Stewart, Tabori & Chang, 2002) and ''How to Meet Men as Smart as You'' (Fireside, 1994). Ms. Brawarsky, who graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, is a daughter of Muriel and Jack Brawarsky of Boynton Beach, Fla.
        Mr. Lichtenberg, also 50, is a senior partner in Schwartz, Lichtenberg, a Manhattan law firm. He graduated summa cum laude from Queens College and received his law degree from Cornell. He is a son of Vera and William Lichtenberg of Belle Harbor, Queens.
        The couple met at the suggestion of Mr. Lichtenberg's first wife, the late Rifka Rosenwein. She and Mr. Lichtenberg had three children together. Before she died in 2003, after battling cancer, he said, she told him that he should marry again. ''She said to me 'There are chapters yet unwritten in your life.' '' Mr. Lichtenberg said. ''I initially balked. I'd never met Sandee, so I said, 'Who is this woman?' Rifka answered, 'She's a good person, she's pretty and she would be good for you.' ''
        Ms. Brawarsky said that she and Rifka Rosenwein had been friendly for many years and would occasionally meet for lunch. ''She would introduce me to various men,'' said Ms. Brawarsky, who had never been married before. But the two women were not so close that she had ever met Barry and their children.
        After Ms. Rosenwein's death, Ms. Brawarsky made a condolence call to the family home, which, Mr. Lichtenberg said, ''was the first time I met her.''
        About a year later, Ms. Brawarsky and Mr. Lichtenberg were reintroduced when friends seated them together at a benefit dinner in Manhattan. They struck up a conversation that spilled over into an exchange of e-mail messages. ''It established a rapport,'' he said. ''And after a while I found myself waiting with bated breath for her next e-mail.''
        ''Finally, I gathered up the nerve to ask her out to lunch,'' Mr. Lichtenberg said. ''Had it not been for Rifka, I don't think I would have asked her out.''
        On his first dinner date with Ms. Brawarsky, Mr. Lichtenberg revealed his wife's dying wish.
        ''I was stunned,'' Ms. Brawarsky recalled. ''She certainly had never suggested to me that I should look up Barry after her death.
        ''So I said to him, 'You're joking, right?' ''
        At that, Mr. Lichtenberg said that he made clear to Ms. Brawarsky that he couldn't be more serious. ''But it wasn't like, 'Oh, what's your favorite movie, and by the way, Rifka says I should marry you,' '' he said.
        ''To tell my children that Mom would have wanted this has really been a comfort,'' Mr. Lichtenberg added, ''and it has helped to ease the challenge of the transition.''
        WEDDINGS/CELEBRATIONS
      