
        OF the myriad donations being made this December and given as gifts, many will go to support or purchase animals. But no llama, goat or cow has received the dubious publicity recently bestowed upon the gentle manatee.
        The mammal was the subject this month of a sketch on ''Late Night With Conan O'Brien,'' in which someone in a manatee costume gyrated suggestively in front of a Webcam to ''I Touch Myself'' by the Divinyls. Mr. O'Brien ad-libbed that the scene could be found on hornymanatee.com, and NBC rushed out to buy the Web address, concerned that someone else would, then post content offensive to NBC.
        Then, last week, a link to the Save the Manatee Club (savethemanatee.org), a nonprofit group founded in 1981, was added to the Horny Manatee Web site. In just six days, more than 14,500 people followed the link from hornymanatee.com to the Web site at savethemanatee.org. At least 22 people adopted a manatee. And more than 200 bought T-shirts from hornymanatee.com, which is donating $5 from each shirt to the Save the Manatee Club.
        ''All because of hornymanatee.com,'' said Patrick Rose, an aquatic biologist and the executive director of the Save the Manatee Club, based in Maitland, Fla.
        Mr. Rose said he initially struggled with whether an organization doing the serious business of protecting an endangered species should affiliate with a fictional horny animal. But he trusted the NBC name and ultimately decided that the, er, exposure might be good. And thus an unusual manatee awareness campaign was born.
        Mr. Rose said manatees are in grave danger, with the leading causes of death watercraft collisions or boat propellers. ''There's not any animal I can think of that is so defenseless and so not able to be aggressive in any circumstance,'' he said. ''Even a cow in a pasture can be really mean.''
        Mr. Rose said the link gives him an opportunity to educate adults. That includes Mr. O'Brien, to whom Mr. Rose sent an early Christmas present: an Adopt-a-Manatee packet featuring Howie, a manatee Mr. Rose swam with while doing research.
        Coincidentally, Howie tends to get a bit frisky.
        ''We don't advertise this,'' Mr. Rose said, ''but Howie's nickname was Horny Howie.''
      