
        In the 1940s, a decade before achieving international renown with ''Lolita,'' Vladimir Nabokov solidified his reputation as a lepidopterist by reclassifying the wide-ranging North American butterfly genus Lycaeides, the ''blues.''
        Nabokov divided the blues into two large species -- Lycaeides melissa, the Melissa blue, and Lycaeides idas, the northern blue, with overlapping ranges in the mountains of the West. He also theorized that the blues he found high in the Tetons and Colorado Rockies were hybrids, but he lacked the tools to prove it.
        Now, a group of scientists from Texas State University, the University of California at Davis, the University of Nevada at Reno and the University of Tennessee have proposed that an ''unnamed'' population of Alpine Lycaeides in the Sierra Nevada is a hybrid species formed through an ancient mixing of Lycaeides melissa and Lycaeides idas.
        These blues have colonized the treeless alpine region, at a higher altitude than the habitats of their parents, said Zachariah Gompert, a graduate student in biology at Texas State and principal author of the group's paper, published in the Nov. 30 online edition of Science. Lycaeides melissa is found in the Great Basin on the east side of the Sierras; Lycaeides idas frequents wet meadows that reach halfway up the west slope.
        Combined with other behavioral and physical changes, the habitat shift has isolated the Alpine blues reproductively from the parent species -- a necessity if they are to be granted species status, Mr. Gompert said. The female shows an affinity for the balloonpod milkvetch, a plant found at higher elevations in the Sierras, which the parent species ignore, Mr. Gompert said. Alpine blues appear to prefer mates who have designs on their wings that are similar to their own, he added. And unlike those of other Lycaeides, their eggs drop from the host plant, while their hatching is delayed through winter.
        The Alpine blue's genome represents a mosaic of the parent species, he added, and other genetic data indicate that the Alpine blues, at 440,000 years old, are considerably younger than Lycaeides melissa or idas, which emerged 1.9 million and 1.26 million years ago, respectively. During a period of glacial advance, he speculated, small groups of the two parent species caught in isolated pockets cross-bred, and their hybrid offspring survived.
        The research group plans to look for reproducing hybrid blue populations in other mountain ranges, said Dr. Chris C. Nice, professor of biology at Texas State and senior author on the paper.
        The standard biological view has been that a new species splits off from an existing parent species. That is believed to occur when a population becomes reproductively isolated either through geographic, genetic or behavioral changes.
        Matings between species were believed to produce sterile offspring, like mules, or organisms unable to thrive without continual back-crossing to the parent species.
        But as the tools of molecular biology have become increasingly powerful, biologists have shown that gene flow between species, subspecies and populations is far more common than generally believed. Scientists are identifying a growing number of hybrid plant and animal species.
        ''There's not a whole lot of purity out there,'' said Dr. Loren Rieseberg, an expert in plant hybridization at the University of British Columbia.
        The most widely disputed hybrid may be the red wolf, which genetic evidence suggests is a combination gray wolf and coyote. But the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and some scientists insist it is the indigenous wolf of the Southeastern United States that, as its numbers declined, mated with abundant coyotes. To prevent the red wolf from being ''swamped'' by coyotes, the service put the last ''pure'' red wolves into a captive breeding program in 1980.
        The transfer of genes between species is a continuum, with homogenization where one or both species are absorbed at one end, and a new hybrid species at the other, said Daniel J. Fust, assistant professor of biology at Vanderbilt University.
        Dr. Don J. Melnick, director of the Center for Environmental Research and Conservation at Columbia University, said, ''We're really learning that evolution is a more complicated and more dynamic process than many of us thought.''
        Correction:  December 22, 2006, Friday  An article in Science Times on Tuesday about a hybrid butterfly species in the Sierra Nevada Mountains misstated the surname of a Vanderbilt University biologist who commented on hybridization. He is Daniel J. Funk, not Fust.
      