
        In the wake of the disastrous 2004-5 lockout, the National Hockey League enacted several rule changes and cracked down on obstruction fouls, all meant to increase on-ice creativity and scoring. And it worked; scoring rose significantly last season.
        But this season, despite the same rules and a continued crackdown, scoring is down. In fact, more than half the gain registered last season has been lost. League officials do not profess concern.
        ''Scoring remains up considerably from 2003-4,'' Frank Brown, the N.H.L.'s vice president for media relations, said in an e-mail message. ''It is inappropriate, after just one and a third seasons of a new era, to make any sweeping generalizations or grand pronouncements beyond that.''
        Certainly, the game looks a great deal livelier over the past season and a third than it has in years. Enforcing obstruction allows for fairer and freer play, and the addition of a reduced-risk overtime period (teams receive a point in the standings even if they lose in overtime) and a shootout if teams are still tied after the five-minute overtime has generated a lot of open skating.
        But all is not necessarily as it seems. The N.H.L. counts overtime goals toward its overall scoring average, and it awards an extra goal to the team that wins the shootout, both of which inflate scoring figures.
        But those postregulation formats bear little resemblance to regulation or playoff hockey. If goals scored and minutes played under those formats are excluded from the calculation, a truer measure of offense emerges.
        Last season, teams scored 5.94 goals per 60 minutes of regulation play, about half a goal higher than in the previous few prelockout seasons, and the highest since 1995-96.
        But this season, the 60-minute average has dropped to 5.66 through Wednesday's games.
        To put these figures in context, consider that over the 22 seasons of the so-called Original Six era, 1945-46 through 1966-67, the scoring rate remained remarkably steady, about 5.6 goals a game. Over the 13 years of the Expansion Era, 1967-68 through 1979-80, it rose to about 6.4 goals a game. It continued to rise through the 1980s, when it was 7.6.
        Then came a decline: The average dipped below 6.00 in 1994-95 and to 5.19 goals in 1998-99. Scoring shuffled along in the low 5's through 2003-4.
        After last season's brief spike, scoring has dropped back to the levels of the 1950s and '60s.
        Is it because of the goalies' equipment, which is still large despite a mandated one-inch width reduction starting last season? Or have teams become acclimated to the new rules and devised defensive systems?
        ''Coaches are paid to get points,'' Brown said. ''They are particularly good at adjusting to trends, so it shouldn't be a surprise that they may have adjusted tactically to the offensive trend of 2005-6.''
        The idea behind the rule changes was to win back fans lost during the previous decade, when the game devolved into a hook-and-hold wrestling match, with dwindling goal totals and television ratings. How a continuing drop in goals would affect fan interest is an open question.
        The Sharks Get It Together
        The Sharks have been steady contenders, winning 40 or more games four of the past five seasons. They have, perhaps, been underachievers as well, reaching the Stanley Cup semifinals once.
        This season, however, they look dangerous. The Sharks are second in the tight Pacific Division behind league-leading Anaheim.
        The Sharks began a major transformation about a year ago when they traded for Boston's big center, Joe Thornton, who scored 92 points in 58 games with San Jose. Thornton, 27, who is in his 10th N.H.L. season, had 8 goals and 29 assists in 33 games through Friday, tied for 11th in the league in points. The second-line center and captain Patrick Marleau, also 27, was on a career-high pace with 14 goals and 18 assists. Right wing Jonathan Cheechoo, 26, is far behind his 56-goal pace from last season but is starting to re-emerge after an injury.
        Even younger players are shouldering a big part of the load. The second-year wing Milan Michalek, 21, was averaging nearly a point a game and had a team-high plus-10 mark. Right wing Steve Bernier, 21, had 10 goals and 14 assists. Two more big youngsters, the rookie Matt Carle, 22, and the third-year man Christian Ehrhoff, 24, lead the defense.
        Evgeni Nabokov has given San Jose fine goaltending most of the past five seasons, but had a terrible 2005-6 season to leave the door open for his backup, Vesa Toskala, to step in. They have split duties this season. Toskala has been stellar, posting a .922 save percentage through Friday, but it looks as if he has pushed Nabokov, whose save percentage is .929, to greater heights.
        With those numbers, these Sharks may have not only teeth, but playoff legs as well.
        The Second Assist
        Hockey has several somewhat peculiar conventions, perhaps none odder than the second assist. What other sport awards full scoring credit to someone who may have happened to touch the puck before it touched another person on the way to the person who gets the goal?
        The N.H.L. started regularly awarding more than one assist a goal in the 1931-32 season, so most fans do not think about it anymore.
        But this season, the second assist was abolished in the Czech Extraliga and at all levels of the game in the Czech Republic. The official reason was that the second assist was often awarded wrongly to players who had nothing to do with a goal-scoring play. Opponents of the move say that the real reason is to lower players' scoring totals, giving a team an edge in player-contract negotiations.
        The effect is noticeable on the Extraliga's list of top scorers. Only three players among the league's 14 clubs have as many as half an assist a game. Among the N.H.L.'s 30 clubs, some 80 players have recorded assists at that rate.
        Modano and Stars Ailing
        It has been a tough couple of weeks for the Dallas Stars. On Dec. 6, their inspirational 40-year-old forward, Joe Nieuwendyk, retired because of a bad back. And on Thursday, Mike Modano, their longtime star, was placed on the injured reserve list.
        Modano, 36, has been sidelined since Dec. 4, when he sustained what was described as a groin/hip injury during a 1-0 victory against San Jose.
        Modano has experienced a falloff in scoring this season, as have the Stars, who had fallen to 22nd in the league, from ninth, through Friday. Modano has scored 495 regular-season goals in his 18-year career.
        SUNDAY SHOOTOUT
        Correction:  December 23, 2006, Saturday  A report in last week's Sunday Shootout column in sports misidentified the National Hockey League team from which Joe Nieuwendyk retired on Dec. 6. It is the Florida Panthers, not the Dallas Stars.
        Correction:  February 10, 2007, Saturday  A sports article yesterday about the United States Hockey Hall of Fame referred imprecisely to the number of teams in the National Hockey League in the 1930s and '40s. The league ranged from 7 to 10 teams in the 1930s; there were not just six. The 1942-3 season did have six teams. Also, a report in the Sunday Shootout column on Dec. 17 misstated the year the so-called Original Six era of hockey began and the number of seasons that it lasted. It began in 1942, not 1945, and it ended in 1967 after 25 seasons, not 22. (The errors in the Dec. 17 article were discovered during research on the number of teams.)
      