
        IN an oft-told anecdote, the playwright George S. Kaufman once interrupted a conversation in a theater lobby while the notoriously script-mangling Marx Brothers were onstage with one of his plays. ''Wait a minute,'' Kaufman said. ''I think I just heard one of my lines.''
        Recently, the screenwriters Thomas Lennon and Robert Ben Garant had a similar experience with ''Let's Go to Prison.'' They collaborated on the screenplay, but when Mr. Lennon saw the finished film, he said, ''I was flabbergasted because I recognized the entire movie.''
        Mr. Grant added, ''In our heads, a lot of the stuff was exactly like that'' -- including a prison-cell assault accompanied by the easy-jazz classic ''Feels So Good.''
        ''It was one of my most satisfying days in show business,'' Mr. Lennon said, ''hearing Chuck Mangione over the rape scene.''
        Lennon and Garant are not, obviously, Kaufman and Hart, nor Garson Kanin and Ruth Gordon, nor even Zucker, Zucker and Abrahams (''Airplane!''). If they can be comfortably compared to any other screenwriting pair, it is probably Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel, the once-ubiquitous studio comedy team responsible for '90s hits like ''City Slickers'' and ''A League of Their Own.'' Mr. Lennon and Mr. Garant, however, push the limits of movie comedy to realms unimagined back then.
        And they churn it out. This year alone, the team, creators and stars of Comedy Central's ''Reno 911!'' -- and the upcoming feature film, ''Reno 911! Miami'' -- have seen ''Prison'' open (and close). They have seen shooting wrap on their ''Jean-Claude Van Damme meets Ping-Pong'' comedy ''Balls of Fury.'' They are to begin writing the fifth season of their TV show. And with the upcoming special-effects-and-Ben Stiller-powered holiday extravaganza, ''Night at the Museum,'' they -- and the other writers who worked on the project -- are giving exhibitors a reason to live.
        ''I've been hearing great things about it for months,'' said Paul Dergarabedian, president of Media By Numbers LLC, the box-office-tracking company. ''You know, there's this viral marketing that happens in the industry, the buzz, the talk around the campfire. This is just one of those films.''
        Mr. Degarabedian said he had seen the ''Museum'' trailer before an Imax screening of the animated penguin musical ''Happy Feet''; ''Museum,'' too, will be presented in this format, as well as on standard screens.
        It won't hurt either, he said, for the industry to have some solid end-of-year successes, which the Christmas releases of ''Museum,'' ''The Good Shepherd,'' ''We Are Marshall'' and ''Rocky Balboa'' are expected to provide.
        Inspired by Milan Trenc's children's book ''The Night at the Museum'' -- and by Mr. Lennon's and Mr. Garant's visits to the American Museum of Natural History while they were students at the Tisch School of the Arts -- the film stars Mr. Stiller as a newly installed night guard. After dark, exhibits come to life, including Teddy Roosevelt (Robin Williams), Julius Caesar (Steve Coogan), Sacagawea (Mizuo Peck) and Jedidiah (Owen Wilson), a six-gun-toting member of an Old West display. Meanwhile, three crafty watchmen on the verge of retirement (Bill Cobbs, Dick Van Dyke and Mickey Rooney) hold on to the secret of the museum's magic, situated in the Temple of Dendur at the Metropolitan Museum of Art -- which for narrative purposes has been moved across Central Park.
        ''We dragged a wing of the Met over to the Natural History Museum,'' Mr. Garant conceded.
        ''Save your letters and e-mail,'' Mr. Lennon said. ''We know.''
        The liberties taken with the museum are nothing compared with the liberties that ''Reno 911!'' takes with law enforcement. In the farcical television series and feature, Mr. Lennon stars as the hot-pants-wearing, rainbow-flag-flying Lt. Jim Dangle; Mr. Garant is the clueless Deputy Travis Junior. Asked what they owe to the reality series ''Cops,'' Mr. Lennon admitted: ''Everything.''
        '' 'Reno' was originally going to be a sketch show, with the cops as a transitional element,'' Mr. Garant said. ''It was Tom's idea: 'What if you had a sketch show, but shot it like ''Cops'' ' -- you'd get out of the car with the cops and walk into a house and a sketch would happen.''
        ''In the 'Reno' pilot,'' Mr. Lennon said, ''we played everyone: the cops, the perps. The original idea was to be on Fox Saturday nights, paired with 'Cops.' We thought that was an awesome idea. They thought it was less of an awesome idea, apparently.''
        Mr. Garant agreed: ''They weren't so crazy about it.''
        But the show has lasted and, remarkably, so have Mr. Lennon and Mr. Garant. If most manufacturers of sketch comedy can be compared to carpenters, these two are lumberjacks.
        ''The writers that I know usually turn in to the studio what sounds to me like a 10th draft, you know?'' Mr. Garant said. ''Their personal 10th draft. We turn in our 50th. We finish it, go back, hand it back and forth, finish it, finish it, finish it, and our 10th draft doesn't resemble the first one except in structure. And the 20th doesn't resemble the 10th except in structure.''
        ''People think we're superprolific,'' Mr. Lennon said, ''because we have a lot of films coming out. But it's not that we write a lot. Most writers will write the same amount of good material. We just throw more away. Honestly.
        ''We rewrote the first 30 pages of 'Starsky & Hutch' three times in one week,'' he said. ''So we wrote 90 new pages in a week.''
        ''I'll tell you right now,'' Mr. Garant said, ''it wasn't all great.''
        Theirs was an uncredited rewrite on ''Starsky & Hutch,'' but the two have gotten credit for films they would just as soon forget.
        ''We wrote an amazing script for 'Herbie Fully Loaded' that got greenlit on the first draft,'' Mr. Lennon said. ''We were immediately fired, as is generally the policy, and it was rewritten by 26 other writers.'' Nevertheless, he says, they're ''those turkeys who wrote 'Herbie Fully Loaded.' ''
        Mr. Garant added, '' 'Night at the Museum' and 'Prison' are the closest to the scripts we did. Which is cool, because you write some, hand them in, and when you see the movie you're like, 'Wow, what was that?' ''
        Making ''Reno'' is different because they also edit it, and faster, Mr. Garant said. The show is improvised, off an outline.
        ''We figure out the scene,'' he said. ''We just don't write the dialogue, and we work with people who we know get the big master joke.''
        Mr. Lennon said, ''For 'Night at the Museum' it's the same thing; we just bothered to write down the dialogue.''
        The two blame cable television for their work ethic. They started with what has become a cult sketch comedy show, ''The State,'' which was one of MTV's earliest efforts at nonmusical programming. It required them to be both tenacious and flexible.
        ''You had to pitch a minimum of one to three scripts a day, every single day,'' Mr. Lennon said. ''If you didn't do it, you would never get material through. You would rip those pages up and throw them away, or fight really hard. But it's somuch easier to write a script than argue about a script. In the time you'd have five meetings about a script, you could write another script.''
        Working in a comedy group that fights a lot, he said, is the perfect training for working at a Hollywood studio.
        You must, however, be flexible. ''You don't have a Ben Stiller and then fail to customize the humor to fit his tone and voice,'' said Shawn Levy, the director of ''Night at the Museum.'' ''But they were extremely amenable to making those adjustments, to serve the comedy. And I have to say, each notable set piece existed in the script before Ben or I even saw it.''
        (''We write every script with Ben Stiller in mind,'' said Mr. Lennon. ''If you work in Hollywood these days, you might as well. There's no script we've written that didn't say 'Think Ben Stiller' on the first page. And we've given every one to him. Worth a shot every time.'')
        Mr. Levy spoke on the phone from Frankfurt, where he and Ricky Gervais were attending the German premiere of the film at the natural history museum there. Similarly, ''Museum'' is to have its United States premiere in New York at the Museum of Natural History on Sunday.
        It's unlikely that the paparazzi assembled that night will be taking many shots of the screenwriters -- even though they are now recognizable faces. This last fact became apparent when Mr. Lennon and Mr. Garant had their own recent brush with the law.
        ''My real bike got stolen,'' Mr. Lennon said. ''My bike gets stolen in 'Reno' every other week, basically, but it actually happened in Hollywood.''
        ''So we had to go to the Hollywood police station,'' Mr. Garant said. ''Oh, they thought it was the funniest thing ever.''
        So the police knew who they were?
        ''Oh, yeah,'' said Mr. Lennon. ''Our recognition factor among cops is 100 percent.''
        FILM
        Correction:  December 24, 2006, Sunday  An article last Sunday about screenwriters who worked on ''Night at the Museum'' misspelled the surname of a writer in one reference. He is Robert Ben Garant, not Grant.
        Correction:  December 31, 2006, Sunday  An article on Dec. 17 about the film ''Night at the Museum,'' the story of exhibits that come to life, misidentified the character Steve Coogan plays. He is Octavius, not Julius Caesar.
      