
        GOLFERS who frequented the Closter Golf Center in New Jersey in the late 1980s all knew Sean Sunik Kim. He was a 14-year-old golf prodigy, someone older players would pepper with compliments.
        It was a scene that Kathy Younghi Kim (no relation), then a slightly pudgy 13-year-old who worked the cash register at her father's driving range, witnessed again and again, typically with a mix of admiration and disdain.
        ''He was very cute, and quite cocky,'' said Ms. Kim, now 31 and a teacher at the Nightingale-Bamford School in Manhattan. Friends say that sentimental does not adequately describe her. Her father, Sung Hwan Kim, has been known to tell her: ''You have more tears than the Han River,'' referring to the Korean waterway.
        All through high school she worked at the driving range. Still Mr. Kim hadn't acknowledged her, which is odd given that Ms. Kim is like the bubbles in a champagne glass, popping with life.
        Even as a girl, she was able to see a softer side to Mr. Kim, a Korean immigrant who lived in the Bronx and took lessons from a New Jersey golf pro.
        She went off to Smith College, and one weekend, when her roommate's boyfriend brought Mr. Kim to a campus party she attended, she coyly acted as if she had never seen him before. Mr. Kim, now 32, said he recognized her, though. The pair continued to run into each other at parties. When they did, he found he liked that she was thoughtful to a fault.
        The younger Mr. Kim eventually set aside dreams of pro golf, graduating from Fordham, then earning a law degree in June from Brooklyn College. A karaoke devotee, he has memorized the words to an alarming number of songs from the 1980s and is easygoing to the point of being chronically late.
        In the summer last year, after a night out with a group of friends in Manhattan, the couple's friendship took a romantic turn. But the suddenness of it all triggered worries the next morning that she was facing a moment like the one Meg Ryan had after spending the night with Billy Crystal in ''When Harry Met Sally.'' Would he lose interest? Would he call?
        He phoned that night and asked her to a movie. On the way to the theater, he grabbed for her hand. Soon, they were holding hands while traveling around the world, or eating cheeseburgers (him) and salads (her) at a favorite diner. She felt ''very taken care of with him,'' she said, and liked that he was polite and thoughtful with her friends.
        ''I'm not that comfortable around girls, playing golf and sports all my life,'' Mr. Kim said. ''For some reason, I was always able to be myself around her.'' So why did it take him so long to recognize it? Sometimes, Mr. Kim said, ''Maybe you just don't see what's in front of you.''
        On April 6, after months of hinting at what type of engagement ring she might want, Mr. Kim said to her over cheeseburgers and salad, ''So, Kathy, tell me what ring you want.'' Suspecting that the ring was already there, she raced to her apartment to look. She quickly found a ring box in a knapsack, but she allowed Mr. Kim to reveal it. ''You know I love you,'' she recalled his saying. ''Will you marry me?''
        Their relationship may have evolved slowly, but now, because getting married in 2006 promised good fortune, Ms. Kim's mother, Yung Ja Kim, who lives with the bride's father in Alpine, N.J., suggested cramming in the wedding before year's end.
        They were wed on Dec. 2 by the Rev. Simon Hae Keun Nam, an uncle of the bride's, in a Korean-language Mass at St. Joseph's Parish, a Roman Catholic church in Demarest, N.J. The bride's brother, Peter Kim, sang from the altar, ''You'll Never Walk Alone.'' As their well-wishers gathered to leave, the couple alternated among handshakes, hugs and customary bows.
        Before their reception began at the Rockleigh Country Club in New Jersey, the couple changed into traditional Korean dress for a wedding ritual in which the bride presented Korean dishes to the bridegroom and his parents, Gun Joong Kim and Min Ja Kim of North Bergen, N.J., as part of her induction into his family. Afterward, the bride, who still occasionally works the counter at her father's golf club but who is now slender as a nine-iron, sat at a table with her new husband, who beamed at her.
        ''The way she treats me and the way she thinks about me is so profound,'' Mr. Kim said, a few days after the wedding. ''The little things she does, checking up on me, on whether I ate, if it's cold outside, little things that come from her heart, I appreciate so much. When you put them together they speak so much. It's that caring I fell in love with, I think.''
        WEDDINGS/CELEBRATIONS: VOWS
        Correction:  December 24, 2006, Sunday  The Vows column last Sunday about the marriage of Kathy Kim and Sean Kim misstated the couple's ages. The bride is 32, not 31; the bridegroom is 33, not 32. The column also misstated the bridegroom's educational background. He received his law degree from Brooklyn Law School, not Brooklyn College.
      