
        Two elite American mountain climbers are presumed missing in southwestern China, and search efforts are focusing on a remote region near Tibet where they apparently wanted to climb two isolated mountains, including an unnamed 23,000-foot peak.
        The two Americans, Charlie Fowler and Christine Boskoff, were last heard from in early November, when Mr. Fowler sent an e-mail message from the city of Litang in Sichuan Province saying they planned to climb two unnamed peaks in the region. They later missed their Dec. 4 flight back to the United States.
        Friends and fellow mountaineers have since retained an American climber familiar with China to lead an independent team in search of the missing pair. Meanwhile, the authorities in Litang have organized a 13-member search group but have found no trace of the Americans.
        The American Embassy in Beijing declined to discuss details of the case, citing privacy restrictions. ''We certainly are aware of the case, and we're working with the local authorities,'' said Susan Stevenson, the embassy's spokeswoman.
        The search presents an enormous challenge, given that no one is certain which mountains the two intended to climb, or in what sequence. They were climbing in or near the Hengduan Mountains, in a region that extends across eastern Tibet, Sichuan and Yunnan Province. Friends say Mr. Fowler and Ms. Boskoff had planned to tackle several mountains that had never been climbed.
        Mountain searches are difficult even in more traversed regions. For several days searchers have been unable to locate three climbers lost on Mount Hood in Oregon, even though the rescue team has detected their cellphone signals. Earlier this month, a father, James Kim, died of exposure with hypothermia when he tried to find help after his family became stranded in their car in the Klamath Mountains in Oregon.
        Mr. Fowler and Ms. Boskoff are considered accomplished mountaineers and have each climbed many of the world's highest peaks, including Mount Everest.
        ''Christine is still probably considered the top female high-altitude climber in the world,'' said Mark Gunlogson, president of Mountain Madness, an adventure travel company in Seattle owned by Ms. Boskoff. ''Charlie is among the most well-known and experienced climbers in North America.''
        Mr. Gunlogson described the pair as climbing partners and said they left the United States in October. He said southwest China attracted the most experienced and adventurous climbers because the difficult terrain remained relatively uncharted. Mr. Fowler, a writer and photographer who also has been involved in making films about mountain climbing, is considered an experienced climber in this section of China. On his Web site, Mr. Fowler said this would be his fifth trip to the region.
        ''Charlie has a rather extensive list of peaks that he would love to climb,'' Mr. Gunlogson said. ''They both together probably had quite a hit list.''
        Early in the trip, the two climbers sent word by e-mail of an initial success as they made an ascent of Haizi Shan. This week the Web site of Alpinist Magazine reported that Mr. Fowler sent an e-mail message on Nov. 7, shortly before he and Ms. Boskoff left Litang.
        ''We're in the town of Litang for a few days, getting ready for one more trip into the hills,'' he wrote. ''We just got back from attempting a peak I tried in '96 doing a film. Didn't make it that time due to complications with the film crew. This time the peak was a lot less icy (global warming?). We got near the top but backed off due to scary conditions -- thin snow over rock slabs. Had a blast climbing as far as we did, though.''
        He added: ''Now off to one more different area to try a 6,000-meter peak and a smaller one, then traveling back doing the tourist thing.''
        The pair apparently has not been heard from since roughly that time. In Litang a search team has questioned local shopkeepers, but none have seen any American climbers. Searchers also have interviewed Buddhist monks at a monastery at the base of Genyen Mountain, a peak the pair may have been considering.
        None of the monks recalled seeing any climbers, according to a local police officer involved in the search. ''We've been looking for five days,'' said the officer, Nyima Tsering. ''In the last month no foreigners have gone into the mountains.''
        Officer Tsering said a second search team had traveled west to the city of Batang to determine whether the two climbers might have decided to ascend Genyen Mountain from that direction.
        Alpinist reported that files on Mr. Fowler's computer suggested that he intended to travel south, perhaps near the city of Deqen in Yunnan Province, to attempt an unnamed peak nearly 23,000 feet high.
        Mr. Gunlogson said the climbers had been regularly sending e-mail messages to friends in the United States in October and early November, so the lack of recent contact was particularly worrying. He said the pair might have succumbed to a fatal accident or could be trapped in a remote valley.
        He said an independent search team led by Jon Otto, a climber with years of experience in China, has been organized to search the mountains.
        ''Climbing, where you're sort of on the cutting edge, it's a numbers game in terms of the odds of something bad happening to you,'' Mr. Gunlogson said. ''There's all sorts of things that could have happened.''
      