
        The search for two climbers missing on Mount Hood for more than a week was scaled back considerably on Tuesday, reflecting rescuers' increased focus on a relatively small area near the summit but also on the cold logic that any chance of survival is slim.
        ''We are approaching that time when we've got to make some serious considerations about whether we're spinning our wheels,'' Sheriff Joe Wampler of Hood River County said.
        Foul weather was expected to arrive as soon as Wednesday, Sheriff Wampler said, probably putting the rescue effort ''on hold.''
        A third climber, Kelly James of Dallas, was found dead in a snow cave near the 11,239-foot summit on Sunday, a week after he told his family in a cellphone call that he was taking shelter there. Mr. James had an arm injury, possibly dislocating his shoulder, the sheriff said on Tuesday. His two fellow climbers, Brian Hall of Dallas and Jerry Cooke of Brooklyn, had planned to descend the mountain to find help.
        After several days in which rescuers scoured much of the perimeter of the mountain, following various potential clues, they now are focusing on an area on the north side of the mountain, just below the summit. There, rescuers found a hastily dug cave with two ice axes and other tools, critical climbing gear not likely to have been intentionally left behind.
        The sheriff has said that the climbers may have fallen in a steep section known as the gullies, near Eliot Glacier, and that they could have encountered an avalanche. He said they also could have found shelter in a crag in the ice and snow, become buried and now be ''waiting for us to come get them.''
        The climbers began their ascent on Dec. 8, planning to reach the top and then descend in a single day.
        Photographs in a camera that was found with Mr. James's body showed that the climbers ''were lightly equipped but well equipped,'' the sheriff said. Having seen the equipment in the photographs, which he did not describe in detail, he said, ''I'm pretty concerned about how long somebody could last out there.''
        Helicopters flown by the Oregon National Guard returned to their regular bases on Tuesday, as did soldiers in the Air Force Reserve who removed Mr. James's body from the mountain on Monday. Small planes belonging to the sheriff's office continued to maintain ''visual vigilance'' of the mountain on Tuesday, and the sheriff said an avalanche team hoped to search the area of focus before the weather turned.
        Angela Hall, a sister of Brian Hall, asked those who have followed rescue efforts to pray for her brother and Mr. Cooke, ''now more than ever.''
      