
        Moving in before daybreak on Tuesday, the British police raided a modest row house near the red-light district in the eastern town of Ipswich to arrest a second suspect in the serial killing of five prostitutes, a case that has seized the nation's headlines.
        The arrest came one day after the police secured their first arrest in the case, detaining Tom Stephens, 37, a former part-time police officer and supermarket worker apprehended in the village of Trimley St. Martin in nearby Felixstowe.
        The murders, by a killer the newspapers have nicknamed the Suffolk Strangler, rank among the most lurid crimes against sex workers since the so-called Yorkshire Ripper killed 13 women in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
        The man arrested on Tuesday was identified as Steve Wright, said by the police to be 48 years old. Neighbors said he was a recent arrival in London Road, Ipswich, and had come from another part of the town. He had a female companion, according to British news media reports, but there was no sign that she had been arrested.
        A police spokesman described the man's arrest as ''significant.''
        According to neighbors, officers arrived at a house at 79 London Road at 5 a.m., and arrested a man they described as composed as he was led away. The police removed the man's car and built screens and scaffolding around the house to secure it for a detailed forensic examination.
        The police have not yet brought charges against either man for the deaths of the five prostitutes, whose naked bodies were found near villages south of Ipswich over a 10-day period this month.
        The women have been identified by the police as Tania Nicol, 19, Gemma Adams, 25, Annette Nicholls, 29, Anneli Alderton, 24 and Paula Clennell, 24. Ms. Adams and Ms. Nichol were found several days apart in a stream. The other three were found in a wooded area, the police said.
        The police have said that Ms. Alderton was strangled and Ms. Clennell died after ''compression'' on her neck. The cause of death of the other three women has not been made public.
      