
        Time Warner followed Cablevision's lead yesterday and said it would not carry the NFL Network on its expanded basic tier during a weeklong free preview that will feature the Texas Bowl on Dec. 28 between Rutgers and Kansas State.
        Time Warner offered two proposals: it would offer the preview on its digital tier, which about 75 percent of its 1.4 million customers in the New York-New Jersey market receive, or it would carry only coverage of the Texas Bowl to all customers.
        On Tuesday, Cablevision proposed that it carry only the game on all levels. Together, Cablevision and Time Warner serve 4.5 million customers in the New York-New Jersey market, the only one where the preview offer applies.
        At a time of heightened interest in Rutgers, the cable operators' responses maintain the state of limbo for Scarlet Knights fans who cannot receive the NFL Network on cable or by satellite.
        ''I tell people that until the NFL Network accepts what Time Warner and Cablevision has thrown back, it's not a done deal,'' said Kevin MacConnell, deputy athletics director for Rutgers. ''It would be a huge disappointment if this didn't work out.'' He said he remained optimistic but added, ''Right now, it's not going the way we'd hoped.''
        Mark Harrad, a Time Warner spokesman, said the company could not make the weeklong preview available on expanded basic because there are no vacant channels, and it lacked the legal right to ''willy nilly'' replace an existing one.
        ''There isn't a channel in basic you can usurp,'' he said, ''and we can't bump existing channels because we have contracts with them.'' But the preview could replace an events channel on the digital tier, he said.
        The NFL Network has not responded to either proposal or to questions about whether Time Warner and Cablevision's counteroffers would violate contracts it has with other cable operators. Time Warner and Cablevision are the most prominent cable operators without deals with the NFL Network.
        Seth Palansky, a spokesman for the NFL Network, said Tuesday that the offer came with ''no strings'' -- in that the cable operators were not required to pick it up -- but Harrad said that the requirement that the preview be carried on expanded basic is ''a big string.''
        Harrad added, ''We can't offer something that we don't have.''
        Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey, whose lobbying with the league led to the preview offer, said in a statement, ''Both sides need to finalize this deal and do the right thing for New Jersey.''
        FOOTBALL
      