
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Good News About AIDS'' (editorial, Dec. 14):
        What passes for good news in the war on AIDS is pretty dismal these days. Millions of circumcised men have become infected with H.I.V. through heterosexual sex. Circumcision shouldn't be confused with an honest vaccine.
        Circumcision evangelists have muddied the message that the only effective way for sexually active men to prevent the spread of AIDS is by using condoms.
        If circumcised men perceive that they are at decreased risk, they may not use condoms and may increase the number of sexual partners. With repeated exposure to H.I.V., these men could eventually become infected with the virus and pass it on to their partners.
        Condoms are cheaper, provide much more safety than circumcision and protect the women, too.
        Norm Cohen  Birmingham, Mich., Dec. 14, 2006
        The writer is the director of the Michigan chapter of the National Organization of Circumcision Information Resource Centers.
        To the Editor:
        The risk of AIDS is great among all people who practice unsafe sex with an infected partner. I question your comparison of the ''holy grail'' of a vaccine with a simple medical procedure like circumcision.
        The underside of the foreskin absorbs things that can make us sick and then begins to fight them. In the case of H.I.V., this defensive tissue unfortunately invites the virus in through the front door. But what is the effect of the foreskin on other life-threatening sexually transmitted diseases?
        How do you persuade a man to snip off a protective skin on the most sensitive part of his body? Condoms are infinitely safer than circumcision.
        Marshall Guerra  Chicago, Dec. 14, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Although I am encouraged by the discovery that circumcisions can significantly reduce the chances of transmitting the virus that causes AIDS, I am a concerned about how people living in the third world will react to this news.
        We do still live in a world where men with AIDS in Cambodia have unprotected sex with virgin girls in the belief that it will ''cure'' them, as Nicholas D. Kristof noted in his Dec. 12 column.
        I'm concerned that more men will be circumcised as a result of these studies, but that they will then live an even more promiscuous life. We ought not lose sight of the importance of condom education.
        Edmund DeMarche  Brooklyn, Dec. 14, 2006
      