
        When Neta Gabbay got married two years ago, she assumed that she and her husband, Omer, would buy an apartment in Jerusalem, the city where she was born and raised.
        But high property prices, partly a result of wealthy American, British and French Jews buying apartments as investments and for vacations in the holy city, have stalled the Gabbays and a lot of other young couples and families.
        ''The foreigners have money and they push up the prices in every neighborhood in which they buy,'' said Motti Zelkovitch, managing director of Ambassador Israel, a local real estate agency. ''The locals don't have the same kind of money and they get pushed out to the peripheral communities.''
        Home ownership is widespread in Israel, where some 70 percent of the country's 5 million citizens own their own homes. But when the Gabbays began looking for a fairly standard three-bedroom apartment in the city, it quickly became clear that they could not afford the roughly $250,000 that such a place would cost.
        They had been renting a two-bedroom apartment in Arnona, a middle- to upper-middle-class neighborhood in southern Jerusalem. Mrs. Gabbay, 31, who works for a nonprofit student organization, wanted to stay in or around the area. That was fine with her husband, 30, who is studying for a degree in animal husbandry. He had grown up in a rural community outside of Jerusalem.
        But the American consulate is moving to Arnona from downtown Jerusalem, increasing demand -- and prices -- for apartments for the consular staff.
        Eventually, the Gabbays paid $190,000 for a duplex apartment of 120 square meters, or 1,290 square feet, in Modi'in, a fairly new city of about 35,000 halfway between Jerusalem and Tel Aviv.
        ''I have to get used to it,'' Mrs. Gabbay said. ''I'm really a Jerusalemite, I'm tied to the city. Even now, my dream is to buy an apartment in Arnona; that's where I would return in a second.''
        According to Stacey Ben-Menashe, who owns Revadim, an agency in Arnona, the Jerusalem market is moving because the country's continual conflicts are not at a high pitch now.
        ''Any time there's a quiet period, the market starts moving again,'' Mr. Ben-Menashe said. ''People who have money come in, buy land and put millions into a nice property. For them, coming to Israel to put a million dollars into a nice property compared to what that would buy abroad, it's not a lot of money, and it's not all the money that they have.''
        Most wealthy buyers focus on the central Jerusalem neighborhoods of Talbieh, Rechavia and the German Colony and, more recently, in Baka, which is known for Arab-style stone buildings with arched windows and tiled floors. ''Israel is a small country and there's a limited number of properties,'' Mr. Ben-Menashe said.
        For many American and European Jews with strong ties to Israel, an apartment here, particularly in Jerusalem, is a tangible connection to the center of Judaism. Jeffrey Mark, an interior designer who works in New York, lives in Israel and has several clients who are setting up local apartments that they use for just a few weeks a year.
        ''Some say they might end up here one day,'' Mr. Mark said of his clients. ''It's a long-term dream, but in the meantime, it's very chic to have a million-dollar apartment in Israel.''
        Paul Scheiber, a lawyer from Philadelphia, and his wife bought two apartments in Jerusalem, one in the northern neighborhood of French Hill, the other in Baka. They rent both places, one to graduate students, and the other to a local family.
        ''We thought of it as an investment property,'' Mr. Scheiber said during a recent business trip to Israel. ''There was ideology involved but it was a financial decision.''
        Most locals, however, cannot afford the same kind of investment. Arnie Draiman, an American who has been living in the Baka area for 22 years, paid $88,000 in 1988 for a 65-square-meter, or 700-square-foot, apartment in Baka. By 2000, the two-bedroom apartment was too small for his growing family, but the sale price would not cover the cost of a larger home in the same neighborhood.
        So the Draimans rented out the apartment and moved into another rental while they searched, a process that eventually took them out of their neighborhood, to Har Homa. Their new duplex apartment has four bedrooms, three bathrooms, a garden, two balconies and an attached storeroom.
        ''We had several friends who had moved out to Har Homa already, and my wife did thorough research, narrowing our search down to one street and which building on that street,'' Mr. Draiman said, adding the family will get twice as much space for only 30 percent more than the sale price of the Baka apartment.
        In Jerusalem, ''the prices have always been going up,'' Mr. Draiman said. ''That's the Anglo and Franco influence and despite a plethora of buildings in this city, and thousands of new apartments have been built in this city, the market could drop, but it has kept up and risen and this is a clearly desirable market.''
      