
        The faithful gathered at Merkin Concert Hall on Monday evening to hear music by Roger Sessions and Mario Davidovsky. Speculum Musicae was playing for an audience of about 50 made up, by my observation at least, of like-minded musicians, composers, students and family members.
        It is a world no less valuable for its insularity. But even if the worth of something should not be measured by its popularity, one still feels a twinge over music so thoughtfully created and so splendidly performed that speaks a language that general classical-music listeners do not, and often do not want to, understand.
        Sessions is a famous name in American music, one that is given its periodic due. His String Quintet on Monday begged for a new audience, filled as it is with fresh, open lyrical surges and yet dense with conflicting time-signatures and tempos. The language is serial and at obdurate odds with the sensations of consonance and dissonance that the mainstream of music continues in its varying ways to promote.
        In the quintet Curtis Macomber's long, arched violin melodies traversed the thick fields of activity underneath them. This is very difficult music, both in the playing of individual parts and then in coordinating them. The devotion and professionalism given it here -- by Carol Zeavin, Maureen Gallagher, Lois Martin and Eric Bartlett -- were admirable.
        Mr. Bartlett also played beautifully Mr. Sessions's Six Pieces for Violoncello, which in their big, healthy, dramatic way work to supersede the natural limitations of a solo stringed instrument. The contrasts are sudden and pronounced, and the gestures theatrical in a good sense. Even muted moments arrive as stage whispers.
        The feeling of melody delivered in long breaths carried over into Mr. Davidovsky's Quartetto, in which Allen Blustine's clarinet produced lines that moved slowly over wide leaps of pitch and then dissolved periodically into flurries of sound. This is a recent piece and notable for Mr. Davidovsky's abandonment of his longstanding efforts to marry live acoustical and electronic sounds.
        Synchronisms No. 9, from 1988, here with Mr. Macomber's solo violin playing groom, is one of the more successful of those marriages, forming an unusually delicate and elegant linkage of two mediums.
        If attendance at concerts like these can sometimes make it seem like one is eavesdropping on a private conversation, composers like Mr. Sessions, who died in 1985, and Mr. Davidovsky, who is very much with us, should take heart from new listening technologies that encourage individual tastes, promoting musical niches and making mass appeal less relevant.
        MUSIC REVIEW
      