
        Senator Tim Johnson, a Democrat from South Dakota, was hospitalized on Wednesday after what his office at first called a ''possible stroke,'' highlighting the fragility of the Democrats' new majority in the Senate.
        At 11 p.m., Mr. Johnson was undergoing surgery, and was expected to be in the operating room until the early morning hours.
        Earlier, after what his office called ''a comprehensive evaluation by the stroke team'' at George Washington University Hospital here, a spokeswoman for Mr. Johnson said he had not suffered a stroke or a heart attack.
        Shortly before the surgery, Mr. Johnson's spokeswoman, Julianne Fisher, released a statement from Adm. John Eisold, the attending physician of the Capitol, saying Mr. Johnson had been admitted ''with the symptoms of a stroke.'' The statement said that Mr. Johnson was under the care of physicians at George Washington University and that there would be no further updates.His office said Mr. Johnson, who will turn 60 on Dec. 28, became disoriented during a conference call with reporters. He stuttered, then seemed to recover before asking if there were more questions and ending the call.
        He walked back to his office, where he collapsed and was then examined by the Capitol physician, who decided Mr. Johnson should go to the hospital. He was taken to the hospital by ambulance around noon.
        People who saw Mr. Johnson earlier in the week said he appeared healthy.
        If Mr. Johnson's health problems prevent him from serving, his replacement would be named by Gov. Michael Rounds of South Dakota, a Republican. Assuming that Mr. Rounds named a Republican, the 51-49 Democratic majority in the new Senate would become a 50-50 split. Vice President Dick Cheney would break the tie, effectively giving Republicans control of the chamber.
        Senator Harry Reid, the Democratic leader, rushed to the hospital Wednesday afternoon, his spokesman said, but it was not clear whether Mr. Reid had been able to visit Mr. Johnson. Mr. Reid's office issued a statement calling Mr. Johnson ''a dear friend to me and to all of us here in the Senate'' and saying, ''Every member of the United States Senate sends our best to him and to his family at this difficult time, and we wish him a full recovery.''
        In Pierre, South Dakota's capital, Mr. Rounds issued a statement, saying: ''Our prayers are with Tim, Barbara and their family. We are hopeful of good news for our friend and colleague.''
        Prostate cancer was diagnosed in Mr. Johnson in 2004, but his official Web site says that ''all tests now show him clear of the disease.''
        An unassuming fourth-generation South Dakotan, Mr. Johnson was first elected to the Senate in 1996, after serving 10 years in the House, where he had replaced Tom Daschle, a fellow Democrat who ran for the Senate and ultimately became the majority leader.
        Mr. Johnson faced a tough race in 2002 against John Thune, a Republican. With the state suffering billions of dollars in losses from a severe drought, Mr. Johnson and Mr. Daschle promised $5 billion in drought relief, and Mr. Johnson won narrowly after President Bush visited the state for Mr. Thune and declined to announce that he would support the relief. (Mr. Thune went on to beat Mr. Daschle in 2004.)
        Mr. Johnson is up for re-election in 2008. His oldest son, Brooks, served in Afghanistan and is serving in Iraq.
        He is the second senator known to become ill since the November elections. Senator Craig Thomas of Wyoming, a Republican, is being treated for leukemia, but has been at work.
        According to information from the Senate historian cited on CQ.com, at least nine senators have taken extended absences from the Senate for health reasons since 1942. Robert F. Wagner, Democrat of New York, was unable to attend any sessions of the 80th or 81st Congress from 1947 to 1949 because of a heart ailment. Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, missed about seven months in 1988 after surgery for a brain aneurysm. And David Pryor, Democrat of Arkansas, suffered a heart attack in April 1991 and returned to the Senate in September that year.
      