
        The State Senate will examine how to toughen oversight of New York's town and village courts, a Colonial-era system that is already under scrutiny after criticism that the courts are inadequately financed, poorly supervised and frequently unfair.
        John A. DeFrancisco, a Syracuse Republican who is chairman of the Senate's Judiciary Committee, said in an interview yesterday that he would call a hearing to explore how to improve supervision of the courts and consider whether judicial agencies have enough power and money to do the job.
        Recent criticisms of the courts, Senator DeFrancisco said, have ''highlighted some problems that have existed for some time.'' He said the town and village courts needed ''more aggressive oversight.''
        Coming from an influential member of the Republican-controlled Senate, Mr. DeFrancisco's comments had added significance.
        Across much of the state, town and village justices have occupied a central place in suburban and rural politics for generations, and Republican legislators have often worked to limit reforms.
        The justices have broad powers to jail people, set bail, review search warrants and rule in landlord-tenant disputes. But their courts have a long history of abuses of power, racial and sexual bigotry, and denial of basic rights, including the right to a lawyer or a trial. Mr. DeFrancisco said yesterday that the courts might need more supervision and oversight.
        ''When you see situations where people are denied due process and the judge remains in office, that's the problem,'' he said.
        Last month, the state's chief judge, Judith S. Kaye, said she planned the most sweeping reform in decades of the more than 1,250 courts, which are also known as justice courts.
        Unlike other New York courts, justice courts in the 57 counties outside New York City are financed, often skimpily, by towns and villages. Three-quarters of the justices are not lawyers.
        Yesterday, David Bookstaver, a spokesman for the state's Office of Court Administration, said court officials were ''pleased the issue of town and village courts is on the front burner.''
        Two committees of the Democratic-controlled State Assembly are to hold a joint hearing on problems in the town and village courts on Thursday. The Senate hearing is to be next month.
        In Judge Kaye's announcement last month, she and other state court officials said that they would increase training for the justices, require that justice court proceedings be tape-recorded and better monitor whether the justices are protecting constitutional rights.
        But they said current law gave them ''very little effective structural or operational control'' over the courts and suggested that state policymakers address that issue.
        The state's Commission on Judicial Conduct has said that it is persistently underfinanced and that investigation of misconduct by the town and village justices consumes a large share of its resources.
        Yesterday, David O. Fuller Jr., the president of the State Magistrates Association, the justices' organization, said he knew of no need to give court officials more power to oversee the justice courts.
      