
        Senator Tim Johnson of South Dakota was showing weakness on his right side on Friday after surgery to relieve bleeding in his brain, his office said, and will remain in the hospital until the swelling in his brain goes down.
        ''The surgery was considered a success,'' the office said in a statement.
        Surgeons removed the blood during a procedure late Wednesday and stabilized the bleeding, the statement said, relieving the pressure on the brain.
        Mr. Johnson, 59, remains in the intensive care unit at George Washington University Hospital in critical but stable condition.
        ''Considering his initial presentation, his progress is encouraging,'' Dr. Anthony Caputy, the chairman of the hospital's department of neurosurgery, said in the statement, adding that Mr. Johnson continues to show ''signs of responsiveness'' to hospital staff and his family.
        Mr. Johnson, a Democrat, began to stutter Wednesday while on a conference call with reporters, then walked back to his office, aides said. After being examined by the Capitol physician, he was admitted to George Washington University Hospital with what his office called ''the symptoms of a stroke.''
        His illness raised the possibility that the Democrats might lose the 51-to-49 majority they are expecting to assume in the Senate that convenes in early January.
        Doctors said the bleeding was caused by a rare tangling of the blood vessels in the brain, known as a congenital arteriovenous malformation. It affects about 300,000 Americans, but only in about one in 10 cases is there bleeding. About half of those with bleeding end up with almost imperceptible damage, doctors say, and about 10 percent to 20 percent suffer damage so severe they cannot function as they did before the bleeding.
        Mr. Johnson's doctors said the post-operative swelling of his brain was normal. They had done a CT scan of the brain Friday morning, they said, and it showed no further bleeding, but they said they would continue to monitor this for several days.
        Mr. Johnson, who is right-handed, experienced significant weakness on the right side of his body from the stroke and will need long-term physical therapy to regain the function of his arm and leg, his office said.
        Even if his condition improves rapidly, he may need such therapy to help regain the ability to walk, write, dress and get in and out of a car.
        The right-sided weakness most likely indicates that the bleeding occurred in the left side of Mr. Johnson's brain, doctors not connected with his case said.
        Right-handed people like Mr. Johnson who suffer bleeding on the left side of the brain do less well on average than left-handed people, said Dr. David J. Langer, a neurosurgeon in New York City.
        Mr. Johnson's initial symptom from the stroke was apparently the speech difficulty he experienced while talking with reporters on Wednesday. Mr. Johnson is sedated, as is standard in care for his type of illness. If the speech difficulty continues after the sedation is lightened, Mr. Johnson may need speech rehabilitation, the statement indicated.
        Mr. Johnson may also need further brain surgery because while the surgeons removed the blood that leaked from the malformation, they did not repair the malformation, according to the statement.
      