
        In the instant before he was shot, the first man killed by the city's police since an unarmed groom-to-be nearly three weeks ago pressed his gun into a sergeant's abdomen, the department's highest official said yesterday.
        The man, Timur Person, 19, of the Bronx, died after the police shot him five times at close range in the chest during a struggle with officers Wednesday night, according to Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly.
        During the skirmish, the sergeant felt a gun's barrel pressing through Mr. Person's jacket, Mr. Kelly said. The sergeant, who was on top of Mr. Person, then yelled, ''Gun, gun,'' and ''Shoot him, shoot him,'' to a second police officer, who then fired, Mr. Kelly said.
        The police said a loaded semiautomatic gun was found at the scene but stopped short of saying that the gun was found in Mr. Person's pocket.
        Mr. Person was the fourth person to be shot by the city's police in the last eight days, and the first they have fatally shot since Sean Bell, 23, died in a storm of police bullets in Queens on Nov. 25. But while Mr. Bell was unarmed, guns were seen or recovered in the four subsequent shootings by officers, according to the police. In the shooting on Wednesday, a loaded semiautomatic and a full magazine clip were found near where Mr. Person was shot, in the vestibule of a sprawling apartment building at 1240 Walton Avenue in the South Bronx, Mr. Kelly said.
        It was not yet clear whether Mr. Person ever took the gun out of his pocket. Mr. Kelly said the department had not yet questioned the officers involved, as per the request of the Bronx district attorney, who was investigating what took place.
        About 25 protesters flocked to the building on Walton Avenue yesterday. Many saw troubling links between the fatal shooting of Mr. Person and that of Mr. Bell, and said further protests were planned for today.
        The Police Department's account of the shooting contradicted that of a witness, Hector Suarez, 24, who said he had heard Mr. Person trying to give the gun up. Mr. Kelly said his department was still looking into both versions of events. ''I've given you the facts as we know it,'' Mr. Kelly said.
        Mr. Person was with three friends Wednesday night when the group caught the attention of four uniformed police officers, who were in a marked car and on the lookout for graffiti vandals, Mr. Kelly said. When the officers approached, the men scattered, running, and the officers followed Mr. Person into the building's vestibule, where the skirmish then broke out, Mr. Kelly said. It was after the sergeant tackled the man that he felt a gun's barrel pressing through Mr. Person's jacket into his abdomen, whereupon he ordered another officer to shoot.
        One of the men who was in the group with Mr. Person Wednesday night told the police that the group had planned to rob drug dealers in the area, Mr. Kelly said. But residents in the area said yesterday they routinely felt harassed by the police.
        Memorials of flowers, candles and pictures were laid outside and inside the building where the shooting occurred. Several of the protesters had red bandannas wrapped around their heads, inscribed with the words ''Trap R.I.P.,'' a reference to Mr. Person's nickname, in black ink.
      