
        OPEN a copy of BLT Living, a glossy new magazine, and you enter the world of Laurent Tourondel, the executive chef and partner in four New York restaurants. A photo layout takes the reader into BLT Prime, Mr. Tourondel's restaurant near Gramercy Park. There is an article listing the chef's tips for visiting Puerto Rico, where he is opening a BLT Steak, along with a list of celebrities who have dined in his restaurants and a two-page spread about white truffles, with recipes.
        BLT Living is one of the first publications in a new campaign to reach customers of high-end restaurants -- and the high-end advertisers eager for their business. The magazines, to be published quarterly and given away to customers, wrap their editorial content in luxury, with ads for expensive watches, Italian clothing and bottled water. They resemble the promotional magazines placed in the rooms of fancy hotel chains like the Four Seasons, but for now have only 18 pages.
        The magazines are the brainchild of Michael Goldman, the owner of Haute Life Press in Brooklyn. Mr. Goldman, who does marketing and consulting for luxury businesses, insisted that they are not designed to be promotional but are directed at ''savvy customers who follow superstar chefs, culinary connoisseurs.'' Profiles of some of the customers themselves appear in the magazines, which are tailored to the individual restaurants.
        Mr. Goldman approached chefs and restaurant groups, offering to publish the magazines free, with financing covered by the ads. Convivio has just been published for the New York restaurants Alto and L'Impero, and David Burke Magazine will be coming out soon. David Bouley and Terrance Brennan are considering versions for their restaurants, as are Hakan Swahn and Marcus Samuelsson of Aquavit.
        ''This is about lifestyle,'' Mr. Goldman said. ''This targeted group of people who enjoy the culinary experience are also shopping in the same stores, driving a certain category of cars, vacationing at similar destinations and hotels.''
        He said he hoped the magazines would help luxury advertisers reach an ''affluent and influential audience.''
        Chris Cannon, a partner in Alto and L'Impero, said that Convivio is nicer than the newsletter the restaurants had sent to regular customers.
        ''It looks more legitimate,'' he said. ''It's a good opportunity for people to see what we do, and a good marketing tool for customers and hotel concierges.'' He said that Haute Life took care of the text and photography. ''Our only expense is postage,'' he said.
        Mr. Goldman said he planned to expand to California, Miami and Chicago, even the south of France.
      