
        Fresh from a scuffle with the New Jersey Legislature over who should take on the task of re-examining pensions and health care benefits for state employees, Gov. Jon S. Corzine said Monday that he was prepared to embark on ''serious restructuring'' efforts because soaring costs would make it impossible for the state to keep pace over the next decade.
        Echoing the sentiment of a number of financial experts, Mr. Corzine warned that the process used by the state to estimate its pension shortfalls at about $18 billion were way off, and that the number was ''much larger.''
        ''It's impossible for us to stay on the course that we are on today, and deliver what people are asking for,'' he said.
        Mr. Corzine made the comments during an hourlong interview over breakfast at the Malibu Diner here, a few blocks from his apartment, as he offered an assessment of his first year in the governor's office.
        Before the week is over, he is expected to sign three major bills that the Legislature approved last week in a last-minute crush of business: on Tuesday, permitting needle exchange programs to help prevent the spread of AIDS; on Wednesday, authorizing the state to borrow $270 million to build its first stem-cell research centers; and on Thursday, making New Jersey the third state in the nation to recognize civil unions for same-sex couples.
        With the State Legislature on recess until next year, the governor's office took the opportunity to seize the spotlight.
        Mr. Corzine said that he would continue pushing to establish the position of comptroller to closely monitor New Jersey's finances, and that he would also consider the possibility of selling or leasing state assets like the lottery system or at least one of the state's toll roads as a way to pay down the state's $30 billion in debts.
        For the past few months, efforts to rein in property taxes and to assuage labor unions have dominated the State House.
        Legislators, ever mindful that all 120 seats are up for election in November, are trying to ease the property tax burden, which, at an annual average of $6,000 a household, is the highest in the country. One of the areas that they have vowed to examine is pensions and health benefits.
        Last week, teachers and state employees, worried that they would be the target of any such efforts, staged the biggest rally at the State House in a decade as a warning that any cuts would come at a price.
        And Mr. Corzine is engaged in a public spat with two of his Democratic colleagues, Assembly Speaker Joseph J. Roberts Jr. and Senate President Richard J. Codey, over who should do the paring: Mr. Corzine through collective bargaining with the state's 80,000 public employees, whose contracts expire in June, or the Senate and the Assembly through legislation.
        Last week, legislators expressed confusion, even irritation, after Mr. Corzine wrote two letters to legislative leaders expressing that he preferred to handle the negotiations. Since then, he has offered olive branches in his end-of-year interviews, chalking up any differences to miscommunication.
        ''If you ask where can we do a better job, making sure that we communicate clearly and precisely is one of those areas,'' he said on Monday, while eating a grapefruit and drinking coffee.
        At the same time, he pulled out a three-ring binder that included a policy speech from July on property taxes. Flipping through the pages, he pointed to several sections that had been underlined with blue Magic Marker, highlighting his comments on how ''most of these challenging reforms should be addressed'' through collective bargaining.
        ''There is no excuse for any legislator who actually listened to what I said in July, in my view, to think that there were any surprises here,'' he said.
        Mr. Corzine declined to offer any specifics on what he would pursue in the way of co-payments on health insurance or other issues.
        But far from agreeing with suggestions that he had already given in to unions, which have long been one of his biggest supporters, Mr. Corzine said that his main objective in any labor agreement was a deal that ''serves the interest of the taxpayers and general citizens.''
        After all, he calculated that ''at the compounded rate we're going at,'' the country would spend about a quarter of its resources on health care in a decade. And that, he said, is just not feasible.
        ''My friends on the other side of the bargaining table can adhere to whatever position they want to adhere to for short-term gain,'' he said. ''They are actually hurting the people they represent if we don't come up with steps that actually meet the fundamental structural problems that exist. The money will not be there.''
      