
        The Federal Election Commission announced on Wednesday that it had reached settlements involving penalties totaling $630,000 with three 527 groups, including one of the most controversial from the 2004 presidential election, the Swift Boat Veterans for Truth.
        The settlements, which come after two years of inquiries and involve issues still in court, are significant because the commission concluded that such groups are subject to limits on the contributions they can accept if their ''major purpose is involvement in campaign activity.''
        Some of the 527 groups had contended that they were outside the election commission's purview, and not subject to donation and spending limits that political action committees must follow because they were not advocating for or against particular candidates.
        The 527 groups, named for the part of the tax code that regulates them, emerged in the 2004 presidential campaign as a powerful force, particularly for Democrats, who raised and spent millions of unregulated money through donors like the billionaire George Soros. On the Republican side, the Swift Boat Veterans group became the best known, with Bob Perry, a Texas developer and Republican heavyweight, its biggest backer.
        ''Going forward to 2008, 527 groups are on clear notice: organizations whose sole purpose is to influence the presidential election will have to register with the F.E.C. and follow hard-dollar limits,'' said Michael E. Toner, the agency's chairman. ''These cases were decided unanimously, and the commission is clearly speaking with one voice regarding these cases, and I think that's important.''
        The agency found that the three organizations, Swift Boat Veterans, the League of Conservation Voters and MoveOn.org's Voter Fund, had violated election laws by acting as political action committees while not registering with or filing reports listing donors and contributions with the agency, as political action committees are required to do.
        The agency found that some of the groups' activities crossed the line by soliciting donations and then spending the money with the express purpose of electing or defeating particular federal candidates. Those actions, it said, triggered the 2002 McCain-Feingold law's cap on donations to a political action committee of $5,000 per year for individuals or $10,000 each election cycle.
        In 2004, 527 committees spent nearly $500 million, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, which monitors campaign giving and spending. In this year's midterm elections, the groups had spent nearly $175 million as of Oct. 23, according to the center.
        The election commission has been under pressure to regulate the 527 groups, which flourish under a loophole in the McCain-Feingold law. The agency faces a deadline imposed by a federal judge to come up with a better rationale for why it continues to review complaints filed mainly by campaign finance organizations against the 527 groups ''case by case.''
        Calling its practice of individual reviews ''a total failure,'' Judge Emmet Sullivan of Federal District Court here ordered the agency to broaden its explanation for such reviews or to issue a rule that would apply to all 527's. In the spring, the F.E.C. rejected a uniform rule to regulate these groups, although advocacy groups continue to press in court for more regulation.
        The Campaign Legal Center and Democracy 21, two of the campaign reform groups that are involved in the court cases, issued a statement on Wednesday calling the F.E.C.'s actions ''too little, too late.''
        Fred Wertheimer, the head of Democracy 21, said, ''The bottom line, the way to provide clear guidance for everyone -- the public and the 527 groups -- is through clear standards and rules.'' The agency said the Swift Boat Veterans group spent $22.6 million attacking Senator John Kerry and, in some mailings and advertisements, advocated his defeat.
        The group is technically still in operation, continuing to file reports with the Internal Revenue Service, largely reporting expenses for legal bills to the firm of Patton Boggs. Benjamin L. Ginsberg, who was forced to resign his post with the Bush-Cheney campaign in 2004 because of his ties to the group, signed the settlement papers with the agency. The group denied that it had expressly advocated for anyone, but agreed to the settlement.
        "It is far better to end this legal confrontation now rather than continue a costly battle against government bureaucrats in an area where the law is unconscionably vague," said Rear Adm. Roy Hoffmann, founder of the Swift Boat Veterans and P.O.W.'s for Truth. While Swift Boat Veterans was not active in the midterm elections, Mr. Perry, its major donor, continued to finance new 527 groups like the Free Enterprise Fund that supported Republican candidates and opposed Democrats in several states.
        The League of Conservation Voters will pay a $180,000 penalty. The agency found that it financed the Environmental Victory project, spending nearly $1 million by canvassing swing voters in tightly contested states and advocating the election of Mr. Kerry and the defeat of George W. Bush. The MoveOn.org Voter Fund will pay a $150,000 penalty. The agency said it had not found that the group expressly advocated the election or defeat of a federal candidate. But in spending $21 million in the 2004 cycle, the group financed advertisements that opposed Mr. Bush, the agency said.
        Wes Boyd, one of its founders, issued a statement on Wednesday that said the Voter Fund was defunct, and that MoveOn's separate political action committee adhered to federal donation limits.
      