
        Citigroup investors, who had eagerly been awaiting a management shake-up, got one yesterday. But although the organizational chart will slightly change, it does not mean the bank's strategy will.
        Robert Druskin, the head of Citigroup's corporate and investment bank, was named chief operating officer, filling a role that has been vacant since Robert B. Willumstad left in July 2005. Mr. Druskin, 59, a longtime executive who has a strong background in operations, will join the office of the chairman, supervising all of the bank's businesses, with an eye toward cutting expenses.
        The management changes, which also give promotions to Mr. Druskin's top investment banking lieutenants, is an elegant fix to some of the challenges facing Charles O. Prince III, the company's chairman and chief executive.
        The move appears to signal an increased focus on controlling costs, quell internal unrest among Citigroup's top investment bankers, and end speculation that Sallie L. Krawcheck, the chief financial officer, will leave soon.
        But the shuffle also indicates that, despite recent speculation, Mr. Prince is sticking to his plans: more cross-selling at home, more expansion and investment abroad, and, with newly added emphasis, improved efficiency.
        ''The train is on the rails and headed in the right direction from a strategy standpoint,'' Mr. Prince said last night on a conference call. Even if the path Mr. Prince set is right, it raises several questions. Chief among them is, Will shareholders give him enough time to deliver?
        On Thursday, Mr. Prince will try to persuade Citigroup investors that his strategy is working and that the company can close the earnings growth gap with its rivals. To do so, he may suggest that Citigroup needs to increase the pace of acquisitions, after lying low for three years.
        Yet, Mr. Prince's actions yesterday might allow him more time to execute his plans.
        Mr. Prince said the changes were ''not a knee-jerk reaction to getting bad press,'' and executives said they were in motion for at least a month. Still, the shifts signaled to Wall Street that Mr. Prince had heard its dissatisfaction.
        Much of the market chatter in recent days has been about the leaders of the firm's businesses being moved up or out, and the stock has climbed 4.3 percent over the last two trading sessions. Yesterday, the stock closed at $52.88, a six-year high, though they slipped 1.3 percent in after-market trading.
        Despite the recent rally, Citigroup's stock essentially trades in the same range it did three years ago, when Mr. Prince took the helm.
        To put its underperformance in perspective, consider this: The gap between Citigroup's stock price and an index of like companies has never been wider since the banking giant was created eight years ago, according to a Prudential Equity analysis. Analysts created a so-called Citigroup proxy, a composite index that is weighted proportionally by the conglomerate's businesses. Citigroup's actual stock price, which outpaced the index value until 2005, traded at a 47 percent discount -- a record -- at the start of this month. And this comes at a time when investment banks and international financial stocks have never been stronger.
        ''This is the worst stock-price underperformance in the history of Citigroup,'' said Michael Mayo, the Prudential financial analyst who created the proxy. ''They say they are doing fine but their stock price, compared to companies with similar business mixes, stinks.''
        In fairness, Mr. Prince and his management team were dealt a tough hand when they began their overhaul. Intense competition, higher interest rates and a slowdown in the housing market created strong economic headwinds. Citigroup, which has a huge amount in loans and far fewer cheap deposits, has been hit harder by the flat or inverted yield curve than many of its competitors.
        On top of that, Mr. Prince inherited a business that was reeling from years of insufficient investment. Under Sanford I. Weill, Citigroup's former chairman, big acquisitions fueled the company's growth. Flushing out costs was essential, but little attention was given to integrating the bank's systems. Mr. Weill pressed his business heads to squeeze nearly every dime out of each fiscal quarter.
        Now Mr. Prince is now calling for bigger investments in retail branches and the integration of companywide computer systems, making up years of lost ground. Most Wall Street analysts say it will take at least two or three years to complete.
        Mr. Prince suggested yesterday that Mr. Druskin's new role as chief operating officer would be to control expenses. Mr. Druskin, a nuts-and-bolts operator who helped reorganize the investment bank's structure, has conducted a comprehensive review of Citigroup's big middle- and back-office expenses as his first project. In the office of the chairman, Mr. Druskin joins Mr. Prince and Robert E. Rubin, the head of the executive committee.
        Other challenges lie ahead for Mr. Prince. Part of his problem, of course, remains perception. Mr. Prince has been unable to shake the image of a risk-averse lawyer, even though he has been running Citigroup for a while. Investors do not inherently trust him, as they do, say, James Dimon of J. P. Morgan Chase. Citigroup, for example, projected new revenue to grow faster than expenses in early 2005. With the heavy spending in its consumer businesses, it will now take a while.
        There are also significant strategic concerns. On the international front, Citigroup has been aggressively expanding, though expenses remain high. At the same time, Mr. Prince and his top lieutenants have had trouble articulating how Citigroup's domestic consumer business will turn itself around.
        Bank of America's strategy is focused: push as many credit card, checking accounts and other bank products as possible through its 5,700 branches. Citigroup, on the other hand, seems to have a much broader approach. Executives have identified a number of strategic options, from expanding CitiDirect, its Internet-only bank, to building more retail branches or acquiring them, to having a more integrated technology platform. While those all sound like good tactics, they are not necessarily a plan that employees -- or investors -- can rally around.
        Then, there are the thorny personnel issues that yesterday's announcement tried to put to rest. The company said Michael Klein and Thomas G. Maheras would become the corporate and investment bank's co-presidents, although Mr. Druskin will retain the chief executive title. Mr. Klein, 43, will oversee the global banking and treasury services businesses, and Mr. Maheras, 44, will supervise the bank's capital markets and trading groups and regional business heads.
        Mr. Prince also dismissed speculation that Ms. Krawcheck, Citigroup's finance chief and head of strategy, would be leaving, though his comments left open the possibility that she might take a job running one of the bank's businesses down the road. Citigroup is currently without a leader in its alternative investment group, but it is unclear if Ms. Krawcheck would be offered -- or want -- the position.
        ''The notion that Sallie Krawcheck is leaving the company is completely false,'' Mr. Prince said, praising her for ''doing a terrific job'' and noting the reshuffle was ''not intended to change her role in any way.''
        Still, analysts are handicapping future management changes. And Mr. Prince faces the same quandary. Shuffling people does not change the underlying mismatch between investors' short-term hopes and Mr. Prince's long-term objectives.
        MARKET PLACE
      