
        Wholesale prices unexpectedly shot up in November, a sobering reminder that inflation remains a threat to the economy despite recent signs that prices may be settling down.
        The Labor Department reported yesterday that the Producer Price Index, which measures what businesses charge one another for everything from iron ore and diesel fuel to cases of soft drinks, rose 2 percent from October to November when seasonally adjusted. The index had not risen by that much in a single month in 32 years.
        The rise was much steeper than economists had forecast, and it came after several months of data that showed inflation easing at both the consumer and wholesale levels. But most economists said there was no reason to think that prices were on the verge of a run-up.
        ''This shows you that we're not completely out of the woods yet,'' said Andrew Tilton, an economist with Goldman Sachs. ''But I think that taken as a whole, the information over the past couple of months is clearly good news on inflation.''
        Major factors in sending prices soaring were two notoriously volatile components of the index -- automobile and energy prices. After falling considerably in October, the wholesale price of gasoline rose 17.9 percent. Prices of sport utility vehicles, pickup trucks and minivans spiked 13.7 percent as automakers began selling new 2007 models.
        The rise in vehicle prices helped push up the core rate of wholesale inflation, an index that excludes food and energy prices, by 1.3 percent, compared with a drop of 0.9 percent in October. The last time the core rate rose that fast was in 1980.
        The figures reinforced the message coming from the Federal Reserve that inflation has not been vanquished, and seemed to diminish the odds that the Fed would begin reducing interest rates, which some investors had hoped for, as early as next spring.
        Richard W. Fisher, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, said in a speech in Longview, Tex., yesterday that inflation remained the biggest risk to the economy. ''We cannot yet say with conviction that we have turned the corner and have this problem fully contained,'' he said.
        Separately, a Commerce Department report on housing construction yesterday showed that the number of building permits fell in November for the 10th consecutive month. Permits declined by 3 percent, seasonally adjusted, and were 31.3 percent lower than a year earlier.
        But the same report showed that the number of homes actually begun by builders rose 6.7 percent in November, seasonally adjusted.
        Economists said that a November rebound in the housing-starts was expected, because October's level was the lowest in more than six years.
        ''It doesn't change the bottom line,'' Richard F. Moody, chief economist for Mission Residential, a real estate investment firm, said in a research report. ''While there is a bottom out there for the housing market, we just don't know where it is yet.''
        In the last year, authorized building permits have fallen sharply across the country. From November 2005 to November 2006, the rate dropped 41.1 percent in the West, 30 percent in the Northeast, 33 percent in the Midwest and 25.7 percent in the South.
        In its latest policy statement, issued last week, the Fed made its clearest acknowledgment to date that economic growth was faltering, particularly in the housing market.
        Still, economists said the Fed would probably want more evidence of weakness before thinking about easing off the monetary brake pedal. Joel L. Naroff, president of Naroff Economic Advisers, said the central bank was likely to wait several months ''before making any judgments about the condition of the housing market.''
        The government reported last week that the Consumer Price Index was unchanged in November largely because of falling fuel prices.
      