
        Sheldon Fox, who was part of the founding triumvirate of Kohn Pedersen Fox, one of the country's most successful architectural firms, died on Saturday at his home in Fairfield, Conn. He was 76 and had until recently been a longtime resident of Stamford, Conn.
        The cause was complications of brain cancer, his family said.
        A native New Yorker, Mr. Fox was the operations manager of a partnership that began in 1976 and quickly rose to the top rank of American architectural firms with international reach. It now has offices in New York, London and Shanghai.
        Mr. Fox, an architect, acted as partner in charge of some of the firm's most prominent projects, including the imposing World Bank headquarters in Washington; 333 West Wacker Drive in Chicago, a curving, green-glass tower along the Chicago River; and the cluster of buildings on the West Side of Manhattan for the ABC television network.
        The firm -- KPF, as it styled itself -- thrived on close coordination among the partners and a clear division of labor among them. William Pedersen became the principal designer. A. Eugene Kohn was the chief marketer, shopping the right concepts to the right clients. And Mr. Fox took on the tasks of manager, overseeing the back office and choreographing the many facets involved in large architectural projects, from conception to the ribbon-cutting.
        Mr. Fox's role was to build consensus among clients, their consultants and building managers and to get projects built within budget and on time. He frequently put on a hard hat and toured muddy construction sites. He tended to payrolls and the firm's financial health and organized staff members of the firm as it grew to about 300 people during his 21 years as managing partner.
        In the case of the Washington headquarters for the World Bank, completed in 1996, KPF won the international competition with Mr. Pedersen's design, which incorporated existing buildings by Skidmore, Owings & Merrill and Vincent Kling into a new 13-story, 1.3 million-square-foot modernist structure facing Pennsylvania Avenue.
        Mr. Fox oversaw the project to its completion. He developed a comprehensive plan and spent long days in negotiations to preserve the design over conflicting budgetary demands. In the end, the firm credited his determination as much as Mr. Pedersen's design for getting that and other jobs done on time.
        Sheldon Fox was born in the Bronx and received a bachelor's degree in architecture at the University of Pennsylvania in 1953. He then served as a first lieutenant in the Army in Korea. He began his career in 1955, as a draftsman for Kahn & Jacobs, Architects, where he later became a partner. In 1972 he moved to John Carl Warnecke & Associates as a senior vice president.
        Mr. Kohn, a former classmate of his at the University of Pennsylvania, was a partner at Warnecke, and Mr. Pedersen, who had earlier worked for I. M. Pei & Associates, was a vice president. Four years later the three teamed up to found Kohn Pedersen Fox Architects. Mr. Fox retired 10 years ago. He was active in civic affairs in New York and in Stamford and lectured on architectural management. He was a fellow of the American Institute of Architects and of the Architectural League of New York.
        He is survived by his wife of 52 years, Judith Landa Fox; two sons, Peter, of Bridgeport, Conn., and Jeffrey, of Providence, R.I.; a daughter, Mindy Fox Pritchard, of Fairfield, Conn.; two sisters, Joan Norman, of Whitestone, Queens, and Phyllis Kraft of Los Angeles; and four grandchildren.
      