
        A man fatally shot by the police on the fire escape outside his Bronx apartment on Saturday night was descending the stairs toward two officers and wielding an ax over his head when one of the officers fired, the police said yesterday.
        The investigation suggests that the shooting was justified, said Paul J. Browne, a police spokesman. ''Preliminary findings indicate that the shooting was within department guidelines,'' he said. The police released additional details in the shooting yesterday, as detectives continued interviewing witnesses.
        The man, Anatoly Dmitriev, 62, had been behaving erratically outside his co-op apartment building at 756 Brady Avenue, near Pelham Parkway, whacking at courtyard trees with an ax, the police said.
        Neighbors described him as a quiet and eccentric man, prone to jogging while wearing nothing but shorts, even in the winter. He had recently returned from a visit to his native Russia and brought the ax back with him, Mr. Dmitriev's family told the police.
        ''He was with a hatchet, chopping on the trees,'' said John Walker, 63, who lives across the street and was one of three people who the police said had called 911.
        When officers arrived about 5:40 p.m., Mr. Dmitriev was already inside his sixth-floor apartment, the police said. A handyman told officers that he had heard Mr. Dmitriev threaten his own son before he shut himself in the apartment, the police said.
        Officers heard what sounded like Mr. Dmitriev barricading himself inside, and an Emergency Services Unit was called to break down the door, Mr. Browne said. It was later learned that there was no one else in the apartment, the police said.
        Two officers from the 49th Precinct entered the apartment below and stepped out on the fire escape in the rear, to watch the back of Mr. Dmitriev's apartment. They saw him poke his head out a bathroom window and wave the ax, Mr. Browne said. Mr. Dmitriev then yanked a grate away from a larger window and climbed outside onto the fire escape.
        From a landing on the fifth floor, the officers ordered Mr. Dmitriev to halt as he came toward them. The officer fired when Mr. Dmitriev was about seven feet away, Mr. Browne said. Mr. Dmitriev continued down the stairs, taking three more steps and ignoring more commands to stop, when the officer fired again, Mr. Browne said. Both shots hit Mr. Dmitriev in the chest, Mr. Browne said. He said witnesses had told investigators that they had heard the officers telling Mr. Dmitriev to halt and throw down the ax.
        The officer who fired his weapon joined the Police Department two years ago, and is 30 years old. His name was not released. This was his first shooting, the police said.
        Mr. Walker said he saw the police carry Mr. Dmitriev away. ''He was unconscious and bleeding very badly,'' he said. ''From the size of the wound, I knew he wouldn't make it. I said, 'Oh my gosh, that's my friend.' ''
        Mr. Dmitriev was pronounced dead at Jacobi Medical Center later Saturday night.
        The Bronx district attorney's office is reviewing the shooting, as is routine. Investigators have not yet spoken to the officer who fired, which is also routine, because doing so might grant a form of immunity and jeopardize any potential prosecutions.
        The police have been called to Mr. Dmitriev's apartment six times in recent years, mostly to quell disputes between him and his son, Mr. Browne said, adding that the son had an order of protection against the father. Anatoly Dmitriev had lived in this country for 28 years and did not work, the police and neighbors said.
        ''I'd seen him running around in red '80s track shorts,'' sad Trevor Gittens, 23, a neighbor. ''He was real thin with bushy white hair and a goatee. He looked like a real skinny Albert Einstein.''
        ''The kids would pick on him, calling him crazy and weirdo,'' Mr. Walker added, ''but it didn't seem to distract him too much. He'd just go on his way.''
        The Rev. Al Sharpton, who has spoken out against the police in the Nov. 25 shooting of an unarmed man, Sean Bell, outside a strip club in Queens, addressed Saturday's shooting during a news conference concerning the Bell case yesterday.
        ''I question and call for an investigation of even the shooting last night of this man allegedly with an ax,'' Mr. Sharpton said outside Jamaica Hospital Medical Center. ''Could there have been a way to apprehend him or contain him without killing him?''
        The police said that the shooting of Mr. Dmitriev was the 13th fatal police shooting this year, compared with nine at the same time last year.
      