
        There is a suspicious gun as well as a police sketch, but still no arrests.
        Nearly a month after a disbarred lawyer from this Westchester County town told the police that his wife was slain and he was slightly wounded by a stranger in a roadside ambush, the police say they are still vigorously seeking the gunman.
        ''This could be a protracted and lengthy investigation,'' Sgt. Marc Simmons, a detective with the New Castle Police Department, said in an interview on Wednesday. ''There is still a lot of information to be gathered.''
        It is not clear what success the police have had in pursuing leads. They were unable to trace the gun that was found in the days after the shooting in a lake near a remote stretch of road where the shooting occurred, just three miles from where the couple lived. And a sketch of a suspect based on a description provided by the lawyer, Carlos Perez-Olivo, 58, has seemingly led them nowhere.
        Speaking publicly about the shooting for the first time, Mr. Perez-Olivo said he had told the police that on Nov. 18, a Saturday night, a driver cut his car off as he was driving home from a night out with his wife, Peggy, 55, then forced his way into their car and shot him in the abdomen and her in the head. Ms. Perez-Olivo, the mother of their three children, died two days later.
        The New Castle police have described the account provided by Mr. Perez-Olivo, who has been interviewed extensively, as sounding ''unusual.''
        Other law enforcement officials with knowledge of the case have suggested that he might know more about the circumstances of the shooting than he has told the police. They say they are still considering several theories, including the possibility that Mr. Perez-Olivo himself had some involvement or that the gunman was someone from his past, possibly a disgruntled client.
        In the weeks since the shooting, Mr. Perez-Olivo has spent much of his time with relatives at his home in Chappaqua, three doors from former President Bill Clinton and Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton. Once a prominent lawyer, he was disbarred in August for misappropriating money from a client's bail and other misconduct.
        On Thursday, Mr. Perez-Olivo disputed rumors that he had not cooperated with the police. But he would not discuss specific details about the shooting, and insisted that he had been unfairly and inaccurately portrayed in news accounts.
        As for the injury he sustained, he said, ''I am coming along.'' Other than that, he added, ''I really don't have anything to say.''
        The shooting has captured the attention of residents in this wealthy suburb.
        ''It was on the front page, and then it just died,'' said Jacque Abdalla, who with her husband, Abe, owns the Chappaqua Restaurant/Diner. ''No one has heard anything.''
        Other New Castle residents said that they remain unnerved and that they did not think the shooting was random.
        ''I still lock the doors in my car,'' said Emily Ginsberg of Millwood, who lives down the block from where the shooting occurred.
      