
        THE last thing you may want to think about is taxes, especially during the holiday season. But some tax planning can be a particularly smart move over the next two weeks.
        Congress has made substantial changes in the tax law for 2006, affecting saving for children's educations, charitable giving and the alternative minimum tax, among other areas, and it voted just before adjourning to extend popular deductions like the one for college tuition. There are ways to take advantage of these changes and save on your tax bill -- if you act before Jan. 1.
        Your first move should be to project your overall tax situation for 2006, or even for the next few years, said Perry A. Shulman, a certified public accountant in East Rockaway, N.Y. ''The most important thing to do initially is determine, 'Where am I? Where do I want to go?,' '' he said.
        If doing this on your own seems too daunting, you can seek the help of an accountant, or an online tax planner. TurboTax, for example, offers a free online tool; to find it, go to turbotax.intuit.com, click on ''Tax Tips'' and then on ''Tax Estimator.'' It will estimate your 2006 taxes, including the A.M.T. if you are liable for it, based on an interview that can be completed in 10 or 15 minutes; if you do not have this year's numbers, use last year's -- with your best guess for adjusting them.
        Some standard tax maneuvers, like harvesting losses in a stock portfolio to offset capital gains, won't need to change this year. But here are some areas where the rules have changed:
        KIDDIE-TAX AGE LIMIT -- Retroactive to Jan. 1 of this year, the age limit for special treatment of investment income on assets held in a child's name was raised to 18 from 14. As a result, the unearned -- generally, that means investment -- income above $1,700 of children under age 18 is now taxable at the parents' rate, not the child's. And that means a parent who made trades within a child's account early in the year, recognizing long-term capital gains that she expected to be taxed at 5 percent, may have to pay 15 percent.
        Parents have the option of filing separate returns for their children or reporting the children's income on their own returns, said Mark Luscombe, a lawyer and accountant who is the principal tax analyst at CCH, a publisher of books and software for tax professionals. While it is generally better to file separate returns, there are exceptions. Including the child's income raises the parents' adjusted gross income, but if parents are in a low tax bracket and have loss positions in their portfolio, they might want to use the losses to offset the child's gains on their own return. People would have to run the numbers both ways -- filing separately for the child or including them on the parents' return -- to know which is better.
        GIFT TAX EXEMPTION -- Individual taxpayers can give up to $12,000 to each of as many people as they wish, with no gift-tax consequences, said Sidney Kess, a New York tax lawyer and certified public accountant. That is an increase of $1,000 from last year.
        Grandparents, for example, can use these gifts to help save for a child's college education. If you intend to make such a gift, he said, ''do it right away.'' The money should be deposited in the child's account by year-end.
        COLLEGE SAVINGS -- Section 529 college savings plans have been made more attractive this year. In a 529 plan, after-tax money goes into the account, but distributions, including earnings on the money, are tax-free when used for qualified expenses. This tax exclusion had been scheduled to expire in 2010, but the Pension Protection Act enacted on Aug. 17 made it permanent. Many states, including New York, also allow a tax deduction for the plans.
        CHARITABLE GIVING -- Any used clothing and household goods donated after Aug. 17 must be in good or better condition to be deductible -- and then only at thrift-shop or rummage-sale prices, not at the donor's cost.
        But there is an exception; a single used item appraised at more than $500 need not be in good condition for a deduction. For example, a fur coat that needs some attention might qualify, Mr. Shulman said. He recommended that donors keep detailed lists of items given, and possibly photographs as well, in case they need to substantiate their deductions. Taxpayers need a receipt for gifts to charity of $250 or more, and, beginning next year, they will need receipts or canceled checks for gifts of any amount.
        Dropping cash into the poor box may help the poor, but not the taxpayer. Giving appreciated securities, however, will benefit the taxpayer, Julian Block, a tax lawyer in Larchmont, N.Y., said. The securities are deductible at market value, and neither the taxpayer nor the charity has to pay capital gains tax. But taxpayers should act soon because it may take a few days to transfer the securities.
        I.R.A. holders aged 70 1/2  or older are normally required to take minimum annual distributions from their accounts, but for 2006 and 2007, they may instead have the I.R.A. custodian make a direct transfer to a charity of some or all of the distribution up to $100,000, thus avoiding increasing their own adjusted gross income.
        ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX -- About 3.6 million taxpayers were snared by the A.M.T. in 2005, especially in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and California, according to calculations by the Urban Institute, which calls the tax ''mind-numbingly complex.''
        The institute had expected the tax to entrap 19 million this year. But Congress, again, enacted a one-year patch, so the institute now projects that 3.8 million will be liable for the A.M.T., which denies certain deductions that the regular tax allows and recognizes more income than the regular tax.
        The patch raises the A.M.T. exemption for married couples filing jointly to $62,550 from $45,000 and for single taxpayers to $42,500 from $33,750. In 2005, the amounts were $58,000 and $40,250.
        ''The traditional approach to tax planning is to accelerate deductions and defer income'' at year-end, Mr. Block said, ''but some affected by the A.M.T. may want to do the reverse,'' especially in regard to state and local property and income taxes.
        Those taxes are deductible under the regular rules, but not under the alternative minimum tax, so it may be advantageous to wait until January to pay them. Taxpayers can run A.M.T. calculations at www.irs.gov/businesses/small/article/0,,id=150703,00.html.
        ''People who have exercised incentive stock options need to take a particularly close look at the A.M.T.,'' he said, because the bargain element is considered income.
        For example, a person who exercises an option to buy a stock at $4 a share, when the stock is selling at $40, will have $36 a share in income under the alternative minimum tax, and the tax paid on that income cannot be recovered even if the stock price falls later.
        If you have not yet exercised such an option, Mr. Block said, it would generally be better to wait until early next year, but he suggested consulting a professional.
        ENERGY TAX CREDITS -- There is a new residential credit of 10 percent of your cost for insulation or energy-efficient doors, windows or roofs, Mr. Kess said; the maximum credit is $500. There is also a credit of up to $2,000 for other improvements, including solar heating.
        Credits are more valuable than deductions because they offset taxes dollar for dollar, whereas deductions offset taxes at the taxpayer's marginal rate.
        Buyers of hybrid cars may be eligible for tax credits of up to $3,400, Mr. Luscombe said. Additional information on energy credits is available at www.energytaxincentives.org.
        TAX BREAK EXTENSIONS -- Before adjourning last weekend, both the House and the Senate passed the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006.
        Among its provisions, the law extends some expiring breaks, including the deduction for college tuition, the $250 deduction for teachers spending their own money on classroom expenses and the option to deduct state and local sales tax instead of income tax. Details are found at tax.cchgroup.com/legislation/2006-tax-relief-health-care.pdf.
        EQUIPMENT PURCHASE DEDUCTIONS -- A business owner can fully deduct purchases of equipment of up to $108,000, even for sideline or home-based businesses, Mr. Kess said, provided that the taxpayer has income to offset the cost. Thus, a person who did freelance consulting work, for example, might want to buy a computer or office equipment before year-end.
        SUNDAY MONEY: PLANNING
      