
        Shredded lettuce was the ''most likely'' ingredient that spread E. coli bacteria in the recent outbreak among hundreds of customers of Taco Bell restaurants in the Northeast, federal health officials said last night.
        The new conclusion was not based on testing of food samples, which so far have been negative for E coli. Instead, investigators surveyed what the stricken people ate and compared that with what their dining companions who remained healthy had eaten.
        Those statistics narrowed the potential sources to lettuce, cheddar cheese and ground beef -- all common to many Taco Bell items. Investigators then reviewed the record of those foods in past E. coli outbreaks and the way those foods are handled. The beef, for example, is cooked, and Taco Bell says the cheese is pasteurized.
        ''We think that shredded lettuce consumed at Taco Bell restaurants was the most likely cause of the outbreak,'' Dr. Christopher Braden, an epidemiologist for the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said in a telephone news conference. ''We're fairly confident'' that lettuce is to blame, he said, but added, ''we're not done with the investigation.''
        State and federal laboratories continue testing the backlog of food samples taken from the implicated Taco Bell restaurants. But because of the lag in symptoms and the fast turnover of food supplies, the contaminated material may already have been consumed or discarded before samples were taken, officials say.
        The federal Food and Drug Administration is conducting what it calls a ''trace back'' inquiry, tracking lettuce from the farms through its processing, packaging and distribution. Dr. David Acheson, chief medical officer at that agency's Center for Food Safety and Nutrition, declined to specify the farm or supplier.
        Taco Bell had already switched to a new produce supplier, Taylor Farms, for restaurants in the states struck by E. coli: New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware. The company's president, Greg Creed, said the change, which occurred before lettuce was cited, was made ''as a precautionary move.''
        ''We want to assure customers that it is perfectly safe to eat at Taco Bell,'' Mr. Creed said, based on the restocking and sanitizing of some 90 restaurants that had been closed. While saying that Taco Bell had ''incredibly stringent standards,'' he also called for an industrywide coalition to improve food safety.
        Two factors have hampered the investigation. Taco Bell's practice of using the same combination of ingredients in several items made it ''hard to tease out'' which ones were contaminated, Dr. Braden said. And Dr. Acheson said that unlike the spinach involved in an earlier E. coli outbreak this year, lettuce did not have easily traced package labels.
        As for why lettuce and spinach seem to be susceptible to E. coli, Dr. Acheson said, ''I'm not sure we really know the answer.'' He speculated that lettuce ''just lends itself to catching bugs by its physical topography'' and that bacteria ''are more likely to get stuck in the crevices of spinach plants or lettuce plants.''
      