
        A balky array of solar panels that stubbornly refused to fold back into their box threatened yesterday to derail the ambitious attempt by NASA to rewire the International Space Station.
        The 12-day mission of the shuttle Discovery involves a complex and highly choreographed effort to alter the electrical system of the station from its current configuration, with power being drawn from a set of solar arrays atop the station, to a new arrangement that will draw power from an array that was taken up on the previous mission.
        That new array will rotate like a paddlewheel so its panels continuously face the sun as the station orbits Earth. But the older solar panels block the rotation of the new one, so they must be retracted before the astronauts can proceed to the next steps of the mission.
        Mission managers hoped to get the 115-foot-long array to fold itself back into its original container. As a fallback, they said, it could be folded by 40 percent of its original length, which would get it out of the way of the new array with about 10 feet of clearance and allow the new one to rotate and for rewiring to proceed.
        The operation began just before 1:30 p.m. Eastern time and was to have been completed quickly. Instead, it stretched on through several orbits and hours of stop-and-start operations, with the panels shimmering golden and rippling in the sunlight.
        The work was a mix of tense and tedious. The astronauts were able to squeeze about 17 of the 31.5 sections, or bays, back into the box before hitting a snag. But mission managers pressed forward, since the array might eventually hinder station operations in its partly folded state.
        The trouble was not unexpected; managers had fretted about being able to get an array to fold neatly after having been exposed to the harsh temperature extremes of space for so long. In briefings with reporters last month, John Curry, the lead flight director for the station during the mission, said the problem was like ''when you buy a map and it was originally all nice and compressed, and now we try to compress it back'' to its original form.
        ''I will be pleasantly surprised if that all works without a hitch,'' he said.
        Yesterday afternoon, mission managers could be seen on NASA television (www.nasa.gov) discussing the issue intently, and the astronauts tried variation after variation to make the panels come together.
        ''We didn't get any joy on that last motion,'' the station commander, Capt. Michael E. Lopez-Alegria of the Navy, said at one point.
        By 6 p.m., Cmdr. Sunita L. Williams of the Navy, the astronaut who operated the motorized mast, was trying to retract the array a bit at a time, calling out ''Ready ready now'' before each movement, and ''Abort'' at the end of each. That incremental approach got them down to just fewer than 17 bays, ''well within the safety restrictions,'' said Kyle Herring, a NASA public affairs officer for the space station.
        As hopes of getting the array fully retracted faded, managers decided to leave it in its partly retracted state for the moment so they could start the rotating array and prepare for the scheduled spacewalk today to carry out the rewiring process.
      