
        At tip-off Wednesday night, more than half the seats at the Wachovia Center were an empty, dull maroon, reflecting the color of a new era.
        Andre Iguodala, the other A. I., scored the first basket for Philadelphia against the Indiana Pacers, officially marking the beginning of the 76ers' life without Allen Iverson.
        But the result was nothing new, a 101-93 loss for the Sixers, their 12th in a row.
        Because of a blizzard in Denver, Iverson was stranded in Philadelphia. Of the Sixers' acquisitions in Tuesday's trade, point guard Andre Miller was still snowbound, and the veteran Joe Smith was expected to join the team Friday in Boston.
        The most important players for the Sixers in this deal -- two first-round draft picks -- will not arrive until June.
        As the Sixers' coach, Maurice Cheeks, prepared for the first game of his rebuilding mission, even he had to admit the night was a little strange.
        ''It's a little different when you're thinking about Allen not being here, because you identify the Sixers with Allen Iverson,'' said Cheeks, who played on Philadelphia's 1983 championship team, which was identified by Julius Erving.
        Iverson's 11-year career seemed to hit its peak along with the Sixers in 2001, when he was named the league's most valuable player and led Philadelphia to the finals, with Larry Brown as the coach. Brown has been advising Billy King, his former general manager and now the Sixers' president, since the season began, and did so throughout the trade. The Sixers could formalize this arrangement soon.
        Brown, after being fired by the Knicks in June and receiving his $18.5 million settlement in arbitration in September, has moved back to Philadelphia. His return to the Sixers' bench, coinciding with the team's rebuilding, was a possibility that King did not dismiss.
        ''I've been talking to Larry -- he was at the Miami game, he's been at some practices,'' King said before Wednesday's game. ''As for the future, I don't know.''
        But when asked whether it was possible Brown could coach the Sixers again, King responded: ''I don't think so. Maurice is our coach. Maurice has been under a difficult situation, and I don't think it's appropriate to go down that road.''
        If the Sixers began on an uncertain path Wednesday night, they could not help but take some glimpses back at Iverson. He told ESPN that he had not asked for a trade, but wanted changes made. After the game, Cheeks said he knew of no changes Iverson wanted.
        As the third most notable player the Sixers have traded in their history -- the others being Charles Barkley and Wilt Chamberlain -- Iverson had attracted fans like no other player in and out of Philadelphia.
        But Iverson's ability to put people in the seats had waned over the last three seasons, as attendance had dropped from an average of 19,233 in the 2003-4 season to 14,797 this season. Iverson was on the inactive list for six of the Sixers previous 11 losses.
        Wednesday night, the Sixers dropped to 5-19. Jermaine O'Neal had 34 points and 11 rebounds, and Stephen Jackson had 25 points for Indiana. Philadelphia got 20 points each from Iguodala and Kyle Korver.
        Cheeks said Miller, a true point guard, would help the young players improve. Only casually did Cheeks -- with whom Iverson clashed at the end -- slight Iverson by saying he never wanted to change his game. ''Having said that, I want people to play a team game,'' he said.
        Cheeks called Iverson ''phenomenal'' and ''short of amazing,'' an apt description for a 6-foot guard who has averaged more than 30 points for the last two seasons.
        ''That's why his popularity was so high, he was always the small guy doing amazing things in a league that has big people,'' Cheeks said. While he was willing to debate Iverson's place in the ''best 6-foot player of all time,'' one basketball legend was not about to go there.
        ''Allen's a very good player, but you can't say that,'' Larry Bird, the Pacers' president, said Wednesday night. ''How about Isiah to start with?'' he said, referring to Knicks Coach Isiah Thomas. ''How about Nate Archibald?''
        Asked to assess the trade, a fan, Martel Thompkins, in his Iguodala jersey, said of Iverson: ''They should have traded him two years ago. Then we would have gotten something for him.''
        BASKETBALL
      