
        Access to the snow that has blanketed the mountains and filled in the crags of the vast Wasatch-Cache National Forest is reigniting a years-old dispute between snowmobile riders and cross-country skiers over who should be allowed to play on certain public lands here.
        The federal Forest Service is expected to decide by the end of December among four plans for a tiny, though highly coveted part of Logan Canyon in the 1.2-million-acre forest.
        Both sides agree that at its core the feud is a policy clash about recreation on public lands and the compatibility of motorized and nonmotorized outdoor sports.
        Skiers and snowmobilers have been drawn to the canyon for decades. But in the 1990s, engine advances enabled snowmobiles to climb steep slopes and traverse deep snow. Ever since, tensions between the groups have intensified here and across the West.
        Skiers are allowed nearly everywhere in the forest, although much backcountry terrain is hard to reach or requires advanced skills.
        Snowmobilers are permitted on about half the forestland, but since 2003 they have been barred from the 9,500-acre part of the canyon between Tony Grove and the Franklin Basin, an area popular for its ease of parking and variety of terrain.
        Forest Service records show that the agency's ''preferred'' plan would open more than half of those 9,500 acres to snowmobiles and clear land for a shared 2.5-mile trail linking two parking areas at the canyon's base.
        The other options under consideration by the service include keeping the current boundaries and rules, closing the area entirely for winter use and giving each group exclusive use of the area every two weeks.
        Glenn Barker, a Logan resident and member of the Top of Utah Snowmobile Association, likes the preferred plan. ''We have given up so much over the years,'' Mr. Barker said. ''We're not giving up without a fight. This is the crown jewel of snowmobiling in the U.S.''
        But Nick Bouwes, an aquatic consultant from Providence who is the president of Nordic Utah, a local ski club, said skiers had a right to the quiet enjoyment of nature, free from the dangers of snowmobiles. He opposes changing the status quo.
        Kevin Kobe, a skier who directs the recreation department at Utah State University in Logan, said he recognized that the current boundaries might have to change, and he called on the Forest Service to help restore peace by demonstrating leadership. ''The balance is gone,'' Mr. Kobe said. ''Skiing in Logan Canyon has become about noise and tracks and smells.''
        On a snowy road near Tony Grove Lake, skiers and snowmobilers alike said they had experienced ill feelings, which became so intense at times that last year the Forest Service hired a professional mediator to meet with representatives from both sides, without success.
        Tony Peterson, 21, of Tremonton, a longtime snowboarder and recent convert to snowmobiling, said he had seen skiers swat at passing snowmobilers with their poles, but he also sympathizes with the skiers, he said, ''because they feel harassed.''
        Skiers are frightened and disoriented after a snowmobile ''blows by them at 80 miles per hour,'' Mr. Peterson said, ''and that's just not cool.''
        Kelly N. Leishman, president of the Top of Utah Snowmobile Association, said ''a select few renegades'' had created a negative stereotype of snowmobilers as reckless and disrespectful. But Mr. Leishman accused ski advocates of exaggerating the incidents and said the two activities could be compatible.
        Snowmobilers here said they yielded to skiers and passed them with caution. But Stuart Reynolds, who has a Forest Service business permit to rent two heated Mongolian-style tents, or yurts, to skiers on overnight expeditions, said some hostilities went beyond resentment between two groups of outdoor enthusiasts.
        At a public hearing in 2001, a snowmobiler said he would ''go postal'' if barred from more terrain. Last spring, a yurt was burglarized and its roof ripped with boulders; the burglars left tracks from more than one snowmobile, Mr. Reynolds said.
        Mr. Leishman called the attack on the yurt criminal and inexcusable. But the yurts are targets for snowmobilers' ire, he said, because many see them as emblematic of the notion that skiers are winning this fight. Mr. Barker, of the snowmobile club, added that many remained angry about forest wilderness designations made in the 1980s, which reduced snowmobiling terrain by half.
        In an effort to address the concerns, the Forest Service adopted the current boundaries in 2003.
        A Forest Service spokeswoman, Lorraine Januzelli, said agency officials would not comment on the plan until a decision had been reached.
        Sporting enthusiasts on both sides say the decision is likely to influence recreation policies on public lands far and wide. In Ms. Ferguson's words, it ''will clearly show how the Forest Service views parity in managing winter recreation areas.''
      