
        EVERY year during the holidays, you hear the same old shop-worn advice for avoiding financial stress. Set a strict spending limit for each person and stick to it; plan ahead so you do not shop impulsively; coax your family into a modest exchange of gifts; hunt for bargains online, and so forth.
        Here's a radical suggestion: how about a gift-free holiday season?
        Some people will always revel in the spirit of receiving and spending that descends this time of year. But many others are fed up with dashing through the mall, spending more money than they have on loads of stuff other people may or may not need or want.
        Sorry to put it so bluntly, but when I hear that shoppers spent over $18 billion the weekend after Thanksgiving alone -- a small slice of all holiday sales -- and that the average consumer takes three to six months to recover from her holiday spending hangover, I wonder if anyone is connecting the dots.
        A telephone survey last month of more than 1,000 people by the Consumer Federation of America and the Credit Union National Association found that 33 percent of Americans were already dreading their January credit card bills. (The margin of error for the survey was plus or minus 3 percentage points.) Is that because people anticipate overspending -- or because they will wish they could have spent all that money in merrier ways? For years, my family has wrestled with how to put more joy into our holiday celebrations without giving up gifts entirely. Exchanging presents can be fun, after all.
        For a few years we scaled back to the Secret Santa method: picking a name out of a hat and giving a gift to only that person. Eventually we dropped that and people gave just to their nearest and dearest. This year, we scotched the whole gift-giving thing, and decided to rent a house on Cape Cod where we all could hang out and relax.
        As it happens, my husband and I will probably shell out more money for this getaway than we would on presents. But when I consider the headache and uncertainty of buying things for people versus the pleasure of procuring some serious down time, I know we will be getting our money's worth.
        I'm not suggesting that a week of togetherness in a freezing off-season beach house is for everyone. But there are many people who are finding unusual ways to enjoy their holidays without shopping themselves into a stupor.
        Patricia Danser, who runs a private animal sanctuary in Deming, N.M., says that she and her husband have done a number of things to ''avoid the massive materialistic frenzy of the holidays'' -- including delivering presents to children in a nearby Mexican town and donating money in honor of friends and family to an organization that protects manatees.
        Ms. Danser does not see her efforts as a way to cut costs, but it does make her happier to know that the money she spends will do some good in the world.
        GIFT giving has become such an entrenched part of the holidays that many people are reluctant to suggest alternative ways to celebrate, for fear of appearing Scrooge-like. Sheri Schmidt, a lecturer on racial studies at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, says ''it took a bit of bravery and persistence to break the cycle of obligatory gift giving'' in her family. But when she finally suggested a moratorium on holiday gifts to her three brothers, ''they were so relieved,'' she said.
        For the last few years, Ms. Schmidt and her family have given presents to six needy children, in lieu of their six more affluent nieces and nephews. It is not that they spend any less money, she says, ''but we have so much fun picking out the toys for those kids, knowing what a difference it will make to their Christmas morning.''
        That said, it is almost impossible to uphold a gift-free holiday tradition where children are concerned. Ms. Schmidt admits that she and her husband do give presents to their 10-year-old son, as do his grandparents.
        After all, few things are more satisfying than watching a kid tear through wrapping paper to find the very toy or treat they were begging for all year.
        Although my son is just about three months old now, and the only gift my husband and I plan to give him is his very own college fund, I know the time is coming when I will want to hear him shriek with surprise and delight, as I once did when I opened my presents. To me, that will be money well spent.
        BASIC INSTINCTS
      