
        Like many teenagers in this bleak old mill village near Lake Champlain, Michael C. Burrell had been in trouble before. But when an attempted assault case landed him at age 19 in the courtroom of the village justice, the experience was unlike anything he had faced before.
        He said the justice, George J. Head, insisted that they meet each week outside court, in what people around here call his ''judge's probation'' program.
        There is no such thing as judge's probation, and private sessions between a judge and a defendant facing jail violate rules of judicial conduct.
        But Justice Head seems to have stretched the rules in a number of ways. When he sentenced young men to regular probation, he sometimes drove them to their appointments. One young man was discovered driving the justice's car, and others say they met with the justice at his home. One said he even wound up moving in for eight months.
        ''He's the judge,'' said Mr. Burrell, who said he met privately with Justice Head several times last year. ''He tells me to do something, I'm going to do it.''
        One of the bedrock principles of American law is that judges are supposed to be impartial toward the people who come before them. They are to be decision makers, not participants, in cases. They are not to befriend defendants, and are barred from meeting with them outside the presence of their lawyers or prosecutors, or outside court. At the very least, they are required to avoid any personal involvement that makes it appear they have taken sides.
        But bedrock principles have a way of getting lost in New York's town and village courts, a sprawling world of more than 1,250 small courtrooms. Over the decades justices have illegally jailed people, threatened enemies, protected friends and made grievous legal errors, with little supervision or penalty. The law often counts for little, because three-quarters of the justices are not lawyers. Now the system is under scrutiny by state officials, who are holding hearings and taking steps to fix some of its most glaring flaws.
        What has played out in this remote village in northeastern New York provides one more startling look at what can happen when meager training mixes with plenty of unchecked power.
        ''Judge Head rules Keeseville, and God help you if you oppose him,'' said Diane Webster-Brady, the lawyer who handled Mr. Burrell's case.
        'It Wasn't Professional'
        Justice Head, 72, a retired state trooper who has been a justice in the area for 15 years, declined repeated requests for an interview. But lawyers say he has told them over the years that he can supervise Keeseville's wayward youth better than county probation officers.
        In interviews and documents, several young men -- some of them high school dropouts, adrift from their families, and some with serious police records -- said he seemed to offer relief from their poverty and troubled lives, providing shelter, food, the use of his car, or even tuition or lawyers' fees.
        But most said they felt unsettled or threatened by the control the justice had over them, and by his unusual version of probation. They described regular meetings -- once a week or more -- at which the justice would check on their progress, with the suggestion that if they went along, they would be treated well, but that if they did not, there would be trouble.
        Sometimes, they said, the meetings were in the house of the justice, who is long separated from his wife. Sometimes they were in the justice's small office off the village courtroom, where Mr. Burrell said he met with Justice Head last year.
        ''It was me and him talking,'' said Mr. Burrell, who had run away from a substance abuse program where Justice Head sent him after several arrests in connection with attempted assault and other crimes. Mr. Burrell said the justice discussed his own background, and asked about his.
        ''It wasn't professional,'' he said. ''I think he crossed the boundaries.''
        Other people noticed the unorthodox meetings, too. More than a dozen current or former prosecutors, lawyers and officials in the area said they were aware of the justice's out-of-court dealings with defendants, and many said they questioned the propriety of his actions.
        In January, one prosecutor filed a motion to transfer a drunken-driving case out of the village court because the 20-year-old driver had been at the wheel of Justice Head's car, with its official license plates. After the arrest, the prosecutor wrote, the young man was ''picked up by the Honorable George Head from the police station.''
        Still, the lawyers and officials said they could not publicly challenge the justice because of his power here. One lawyer said he had reluctantly agreed to ''judge's probation'' for a client because it won him a better deal.
        The Clinton County probation director, David M. Marcoux, acknowledged he had heard that Justice Head accompanied some young defendants to their probation appointments. And when asked, he said that no other judge in the county did so. But he would not say any more about Justice Head or his special probation program.
        ''He's still a sitting judge in the county,'' Mr. Marcoux said, ''and it's nothing I feel I should make any comment on.''
        Yet people are being asked to speak up by the state agency that investigates misconduct by judges. In recent weeks, the Commission on Judicial Conduct has been hearing testimony about Justice Head from local officials and some of the young men. Commission officials would not discuss the status of their investigation.
        Meanwhile, state judicial officials have begun a series of sweeping changes to the entire system of town and village courts, which are also known as justice courts. On Thursday, two committees of the State Assembly plan to hold a joint hearing into whether the courts should be overhauled even further.
        Several legal experts said in interviews that Justice Head's methods appeared to be the kind of conduct that made people question the system's fairness and professionalism. Judges in New York have been disciplined for inviting defendants to their homes, or meeting privately with parties in a legal case.
        Ann E. Pfeiffer, a former Rochester City Court judge who teaches at Syracuse Law School, said it was not proper for a judge to take on the role of a social worker, roommate, confidant or friend. ''A judge, particularly in a small town, should be as detached as he can be,'' she said.
        A Hard Place to Grow Up
        Keeseville, with a population of 1,850, is certainly small, the kind of remote place where critics of the justice courts say it may be most difficult for state judiciary officials to monitor the justices. It has a few churches, not many jobs, the hulk of an old Grand Union on desolate Front Street and a changing cast of aimless teenagers who say they feel trapped in a place that seems forgotten.
        The village, which has a reputation for drug crimes, bar fights and beatings, can be a hard place to grow up. One recent Sunday, two young men were hit by a car on Main Street about 3 a.m., and one was killed. Witnesses told the police that the driver, 28, was drunk. When the two men were hit, they were rolling around in the road, fighting.
        Seven years ago, Mr. Head, a jowly, broad-shouldered man, was elected village justice, after eight years as a town justice in the area. He had attended college but did not graduate, according to a document he filed with court officials. He has no law degree; the only training that New York has given its justices for decades is six days of initial schooling and an annual refresher course.
        Keeseville's mayor, Mark J. Whitney, said Justice Head had ''performed well for us.''
        But Theodore Carter had a different impression. A high school dropout with a long arrest record, he ended up before Justice Head two years ago, when he was 18. He had tried to beat up another teenager, he said, and because he could not make bail, he spent 20 days in jail.
        When he was released to attend Keeseville's regular afternoon court session, he said, Justice Head told him that to avoid more jail time, he would have to serve judge's probation and chop wood for the village.
        ''I didn't think it was any big thing,'' Mr. Carter said, ''until he told me I'd have to go meet with him.'' Justice Head set the location: his office in the old school building that Keeseville uses as a community center. ''He told me to meet him at 8:30 at night,'' Mr. Carter said.
        When he arrived, the rooms all around the office were empty. The halls were dark. ''Nobody was there except for the judge,'' Mr. Carter said. ''It made me feel uncomfortable.''
        Justice Head, he said, talked about himself and gave Mr. Carter his home phone number to call at any hour of the day or night. ''It was kind of awkward,'' Mr. Carter said.
        In later meetings, Mr. Carter said, he seemed to disappoint Justice Head because he did not reveal much about himself. Eventually, in a private session two months ago, he said, the justice adopted a harsh tone, taking three folders out of a drawer -- the records, Mr. Carter said, of three harassment charges against him that had not moved forward.
        The justice, he said, seemed to hint that he could activate the cases. Asked what he made of that, Mr. Carter said, ''I think he means he's going to hold it over me.''
        Visiting the Justice
        For another young man, the meetings started the same way: In court, Justice Head declared that he would see him weekly. But the location would be even more private.
        ''Judge Head,'' the man said, ''said he wanted to see me at his house the following day.''
        The young man, an unemployed laborer who is now 24, agreed to be interviewed for this article on the condition that his name not be used, saying he was embarrassed about receiving favored treatment from the justice.
        His years of interacting with Justice Head, he said, began when he was 18 and facing a petty larceny charge, having already served jail time for sexual abuse. They would meet, he said, at the justice's home or office, almost always alone.
        ''At first he didn't want nobody knowing about it,'' the man said. But eventually, he said, people saw him at ''George's house'' or driving ''George's car.''
        Later, he said, Justice Head bought him a used car, and once paid for a lawyer when he was charged with a sex crime in another town.
        ''I just didn't want to go back to jail,'' the man said, explaining his dealings with the justice. ''When you are at the lowest you can be, who else do you want to befriend you than a judge?''
        Another young man, then 17, said the justice invited him home the night before he was to be sentenced to community service, according to notes of a 2005 statement he gave to a law enforcement official, who shared the notes with The New York Times. The man declined to be interviewed for this article, but he told the official that the justice tried to have him do work at the house as a form of community service.
        And one young defendant described a deal that went even further.
        ''We had a meeting,'' the man, Dennis C. Valentin, recalled in a recent interview. ''He was going to help me study, and he offered me the place to stay in his mansion.''
        Mr. Valentin, 25, said his life was in bad shape back then, in 2001. A high school dropout, 19 at the time, he had grown up in a broken, sometimes violent home, he said. He had been arrested after a drunken street brawl, but had run away at first instead of facing the charges.
        He turned himself in to Justice Head, who he said got him talking about his ambitions: to get into the Army, or otherwise get out of Keeseville. ''It's just a rough little town,'' Mr. Valentin said.
        He jumped at the justice's offer. ''I pretty much went to stay with him,'' he said. The justice approved a plea deal: instead of jail, Mr. Valentin would get a conditional discharge that would free him if he stayed out of trouble for six months.
        Already living in the justice's house, Mr. Valentin said, were a 21-year-old man whom the justice sometimes drove to Alcoholics Anonymous meetings, and a man in his late 20s who also had gotten in trouble with the law.
        That older man had lived in the house for years, and the justice had helped pay his parochial school tuition, Mr. Valentin said.
        Mr. Valentin said he stayed for eight months, with free room and board. ''He pretty much tried to get me on the right track,'' he said.
        The effort apparently did not work. Two years later, Mr. Valentin was arrested again -- this time, he said, for statutory rape. He is now serving six years of probation, ordered by another judge.
        But he remains grateful for his time in Justice Head's home.
        ''It was a nice place to be,'' he said. ''The judge is really smart. You can sit down and watch 'Jeopardy' on TV, and he is going to get practically every question.''
      