
        The Smithsonian Institution has agreed to develop a system to document and explain its decisions about why television and film producers are granted or denied access to its collections outside of a widely criticized contract the institution entered into with Showtime Networks.
        The agreement was disclosed in a report issued Friday by the Government Accountability Office that rebuked the Smithsonian for failing to provide the public with sufficient details about the Showtime contract.
        Under the deal, Showtime Networks has some exclusive rights to create documentaries using the institution's collections for broadcast on Smithsonian on Demand, a new cable channel that will be jointly owned by the two parties.
        The deal attracted harsh criticism earlier this year from some documentary filmmakers and members of Congress, who questioned whether the agreement would limit the access of independent researchers to the Smithsonian's public archives.
        The Government Accountability Office reported that the Smithsonian followed its internal contracting guidelines. But, it added, the institution was negligent in waiting more than two months after the contract came into effect to publicly disclose its existence.
        The deal provides obvious financial benefits to the Smithsonian, the report said, and the direct impact on filmmakers to date has been minimal. Only two of 117 filming requests in the first nine months of 2006 were denied because of the contract, while four others went forward under a provision that allows the Smithsonian to approve a small number of independent projects each year.
        But, the report added, ''it is still too early to tell what the long-term impact of the contract will be'' regarding access to the collections.
        The report is posted online at www.gao.gov, under the heading ''Reports and Testimony.''
        Sheila P. Burke, the deputy secretary and chief operating officer of the Smithsonian, said the institution ''fully intends to implement both of the recommendations cited in the report's conclusion: documenting in more detail the reasons for accepting and declining requests from filmmakers, and updating the Web site to provide filmmakers and other interested parties with more information about the contract.''
        The report states that the contract will provide the Smithsonian with annual payments totaling at least $99 million over its 30-year term, as well as a 10 percent equity interest in the venture and an option to acquire an additional ownership stake.
      