
        Performances of the ''Messiah'' are everywhere just now, to the delight of Handelians and Christmas traditionalists and to the dismay of perhaps everyone else. But Handel deserves neither all the credit (he wrote the piece for the Easter season, after all) nor any of the blame. In one of the most productive careers in music history, he surely wrote enough else to dilute the impact of the ''Messiah'' in a well-ordered musical universe. So the classical-music critics of The New York Times would like to call attention to the rest of that huge body of music, recommending recordings of anything but the ''Messiah.'' Their recommendations follow.
        'ESTHER' Patrizia Kwella, Ian Partridge, Anthony Rolfe Johnson, David Thomas; Academy of Ancient Music, conducted by Christopher Hogwood (L'Oiseau-Lyre 414 423-2; two CDs).
        'ISRAEL IN EGYPT' Sally Dunkley, Caroline Trevor, Neil Mackenzie, Simon Birchall; the Sixteen; Orchestra of the Sixteen, conducted by Harry Christophers (Regis RRC 2012; two CDs).
        'MUSIC FOR THE ROYAL FIREWORKS,' 'WATER MUSIC' Boston Baroque, conducted by Martin Pearlman (Telarc SACD-60594; CD).
        CONCERTI GROSSI (OP. 6) Academy of Ancient Music, conducted by Andrew Manze (Harmonia Mundi France HMU 907228.29; two CDs).
        'BEECHAM CONDUCTS HANDEL' Leeds Festival Choir; London Philharmonic, conducted by Thomas Beecham (Video Artists International VAIA 1045; CD).
        ESTHER,'' Handel's first English oratorio, finds the composer in 1718, taking experimental steps toward the format that would serve him brilliantly by the time of the ''Messiah,'' nearly 25 years later. Its libretto, based on a Racine play and attributed to Alexander Pope and John Arbuthnot, is far less dramatic than the biblical book of Esther. Yet its ample musical charms include ''Awake My Soul, My Life, My Breath,'' a lovely duet between Esther and Ahasuerus; two vivid arias for Haman, the villain of the piece; and several magnificent choral settings. The 1984 Academy of Ancient Music recording offers a well-sung and gracefully characterized account.
        ''Israel in Egypt'' is structurally odd: the opening ''Lamentations of the Israelites for the Death of Joseph,'' originally a funeral anthem for Queen Caroline of England, gets the work started with a long, entirely choral section. Choruses dominate Parts II and III as well, a strange touch, given the operatic quality of Handel's oratorios. But as choral writing goes, it doesn't get more picturesque than this. When the plagues are described, hopping violin figures represent the frogs; buzzing, darting string lines represent ''all manner of flies and lice''; the chorus's sharp declamation evokes the fiery hailstones; and a terrifying false serenity suggests darkness.
        Harry Christophers, using small but virtuosic forces, offers remarkably agile and deftly accented choral singing, supported by a bright, thrillingly transparent orchestral sound. He adds an organ concerto (''The Cuckoo and the Nightingale'') between Parts I and II, on the ground that advertisements from Handel's time promised one: a distraction perhaps, but I prefer to see it as a slightly eccentric bonus.
        The ''Music for the Royal Fireworks'' and ''Water Music'' were Handel's party pieces, composed for lavish outdoor celebrations, and if nothing else they should sound festive and regal. Thanks to sharply articulated brass and woodwind playing -- and, in the ''Fireworks'' music, an ad libitum side drum part -- the Boston Baroque recordings fill that mandate. In the ''Water Music,'' Martin Pearlman deals with a pair of historical leftovers -- Handel's alternative versions of the Allegro and Hornpipe -- by appending the original, longer horn scoring to the F major Suite and opening the D major Suite with the trumpet versions. Good call.
        The 12 Opus 6 Concertos, composed in 1739, are as ebullient as the ''Water Music'' Suites, at least in their fast movements. But there is much greater variety and depth here. Andrew Manze leads the Academy of Ancient Music in a performance that magnifies both the dramatic darkness that pervades many of the slow movements and the sheer energy and vibrancy of the fast ones.
        All these are period-instrument performances, steeped in modern notions of Baroque style. But sometimes you want to set the scholarly approach aside, and only a texturally fleshed out, dynamically fluid, thoroughly manipulated performance by an outsize personality will do. That's what Beecham recordings are for, and VAI's collection of tracks recorded between 1929 and 1940 is rich in highlights: among them, three suites (''The Gods Go A-Begging,'' ''The Origin of Design'' and ''The Faithful Shepherd'') that Beecham drew largely from opera movements
      