
        The skit, as scripted for the Dec. 4 installment of ''Late Night With Conan O'Brien,'' was about absurdist college sports mascots that the host and his writers would like to see someday.
        Among them were ''the Boise State Conjoined Vikings,'' who had been born locked at the horns, as well as something Mr. O'Brien called ''the Webcam manatee'' -- said to be the mascot of ''F.S.U.'' -- which was basically someone in a manatee costume rubbing himself or herself provocatively in front of a camera (to the tune of the 1991 hit ''I Touch Myself''). Meanwhile a voyeur with a lascivious expression watched via computer.
        Who knew that life would soon imitate art.
        At the end of the skit, in a line Mr. O'Brien insists was ad-libbed, he mentioned that the voyeur (actually Mark Pender, a member of the show's band) was watching www.hornymanatee.com. There was only one problem: as of the taping of that show, which concluded at 6:30 p.m., no such site existed. Which presented an immediate quandary for NBC: If a viewer were somehow to acquire the license to use that Internet domain name, then put something inappropriate on the site, the network could potentially be held liable for appearing to promote it.
        In a pre-emptive strike inspired as much by the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission as by the laws of comedy, NBC bought the license to hornymanatee.com, for $159, after the taping of the Dec. 4 show but before it was broadcast.
        By yesterday afternoon hornymanatee.com -- created by Mr. O'Brien's staff and featuring images of such supposedly forbidden acts as ''Manatee-on-Manatee'' sex (again using characters in costumes) -- had received approximately 3 million hits, according to NBC. Meanwhile several thousand of Mr. O'Brien's viewers have also responded to his subsequent on-air pleas that they submit artwork and other material inspired by the aquatic mammals, and the romantic and sexual shenanigans they imagine, to the e-mail address conan@hornymanatee.com.
        One viewer sent a poem. Mr. O'Brien asked James Lipton, the haughty host of ''Inside the Actors Studio'' on Bravo, to read it on ''Late Night.'' It included the lines: ''I want to freak thy blubber rolls,'' and ''The product of our ecstasy will be half man and half a-'tee.'' After that a curtain opened, and Mr. Lipton gamely danced with the manatee character. Another viewer wrote a song, which Mr. Pender, the band's trumpet player, crooned to the character. Set to the heavy metal band AC/DC's ''You Shook Me All Night Long,'' it included the lyrics ''She had big black eyes/no discernible thighs'' and ''The waves start shakin'/the ocean was quakin'/my pelvis was achin'. ''
        Reached by telephone at NBC yesterday, Mr. O'Brien said he was stunned and overwhelmed by the viewers' response to what had initially been a throwaway line, and by what that response, collectively, suggested about how the digital world was affecting traditional media like television.
        ''We couldn't have done this two years ago, three years ago,'' Mr. O'Brien said. ''It's sort of this weird comedy dialogue with the audience.''
        He added, ''I still have an abacus.''
        Regardless, Mr. O'Brien and his staff are digitally savvy enough to seize an opportunity when it presents itself, particularly in the aftermath of such Internet comedy phenomena as ''Lazy Sunday,'' a filmed clip from ''Saturday Night Live'' that drew large audiences on the Web last year, initially as a bootleg. After the taping of the Dec. 4 show, Mr. O'Brien said the show's executive producer, Jeff Ross, informed him of the problem, then asked him whether he wanted to mute the mention of the site or buy the Web address.
        ''We didn't want to take it out,'' Mr. Ross said yesterday, ''so we bought it.''
        In explaining to the audience the next night what he and his writers had done, Mr. O'Brien marveled, ''For $159, NBC, the network that brought you 'Meet the Press,' Milton Berle and the nation's first commercial television station became the proud owner of www.hornymanatee.com.''
        Now, by clicking on ''tour,'' visitors to the site are drawn into a netherworld of mock-graphic images with titles like ''Mature Manatee'' (with a walker of course) and ''Fetish'' (a manatee in a bondage costume) as well as dozens of viewer submissions, including ''Manatee & Colmes,'' a spoof of ''Hannity & Colmes'' on Fox News.
        Mr. O'Brien said he knew he was on to something when, on Wednesday night, he was at a Christmas party in the lobby of a friend's building and a waiter approached him with a platter of salmon and toast points. When Mr. O'Brien politely declined, he said the waiter drew in close and whispered in his ear, ''My compliments to the horny manatee.''
        As he prepared last night's show, Mr. O'Brien said he was planning to give the bit its first night off, although he was confident it would soon return.
        ''We don't want the entire show to be 'Late Night With Horny Manatee,' '' he said. ''Though, of course, it will become that eventually.''
      