
        When Senate Republicans return to the Capitol next month, one of their first acts of the new term will be re-electing the Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, as temporary president of the State Senate, a role that gives Mr. Bruno vast powers over what laws are passed and over the direction of his party.
        But senators learned on Tuesday that they would be casting their votes for a man who is the subject of a federal inquiry into his outside consulting work.
        Publicly, some of Mr. Bruno's party colleagues stood by the senator, who will become the state's most powerful Republican when Gov. George E. Pataki leaves office in a week and a half.
        Privately, state Republicans say they are concerned about having Mr. Bruno in charge of a party in need of rebuilding after losing every statewide race in November. Senators will be up for re-election in two years, and Republicans face opponents backed by Governor-elect Eliot Spitzer, a Democrat who won in a landslide and has vowed to confront the endemic corruption in Albany.
        Of the 31 Republican senators (besides Mr. Bruno) who were re-elected last month and were contacted for their opinion of the majority leader, only five returned calls, and all of them were from upstate.
        Others in the party were mixed in their support of the man who has effectively controlled the state government, along with Mr. Pataki and Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, for more than a decade.
        ''I've always known him to be open and honest and somebody who I have full confidence in,'' said Senator Hugh T. Farley, whose district in the Albany area abuts Mr. Bruno's. Mr. Farley and the other Republican Senators who commented said they were not bothered that Mr. Bruno did not tell them about the inquiry before they re-elected him majority leader last month.
        But one Senate Republican official, speaking on the condition of anonymity so as not to cross Mr. Bruno, said the vote for temporary president ''presents the potential for political problems, and that's raised many concerns.''
        Mr. Bruno was one of the first elected officials to call on State Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi to resign after he admitted to using state workers as chauffeurs for his wife. Mr. Bruno, who knew he was under investigation but had not revealed it, said in an Oct. 24 statement, ''We are talking about integrity, accountability and the public trust.''
        Mr. Bruno became the Senate majority leader 12 years ago when he deposed his predecessor, Ralph J. Marino, with the help of United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and Mr. Pataki, who was then the governor-elect. Now Mr. Bruno is de-facto head of the state's Republican Party, and there are no other statewide officials or power brokers seen as having the leverage that Mr. D'Amato had to engineer another coup.
        But the news did reopen fissures in the party created last month when Mr. Bruno installed the Nassau County party chairman, Joseph N. Mondello, as state party chairman.
        Bob Smith, the recently retired chairman of the Republican Party in Onondaga County, who had considered running for the state position, said, ''If we want to take the moral high ground, then we need people who are going to occupy it.'' He added, ''The sad thing is, nobody is shocked.''
        Mr. Smith said he abandoned his bid against Mr. Mondello because he considered Mr. Bruno too formidable a foe. ''I think the Republican Party is going to have to have to re-examine itself,'' he said.
        A private refrain among county leaders was that Senator Bruno is the most powerful figure in the state party, with perhaps the greatest hand in Republican patronage assignments and county-by-county spending. Several of them repeatedly referred to Mr. Bruno as ''the party leader,'' and expressed reluctance to abandon him without an indictment or a signal from Mr. Mondello.
        ''If there is a move against Bruno, it will happen quickly and behind the scenes, probably during the holiday break when all of the senators are out of Albany and away from Bruno's spies,'' said one Republican Party official with ties to Mr. Bruno and several county leaders, and who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he did not want to be seen as publicly disclosing private conversations and strategizing.
        Senator Elizabeth Little, an upstate Republican, said that Mr. Bruno called her on Tuesday to tell her about the inquiry and that she said she would support him next month.
        ''I've known him for many, many years,'' she said. ''He's always been open and honest.''
        Mr. Mondello had no comment, nor did Senator Dean G. Skelos, a Long Island Republican many see as an heir apparent and rival of Mr. Bruno. Mr. Skelos comes from Mr. Mondello's Nassau County organization, and Mr. Bruno's backing of Mr. Mondello to head the state party was widely seen among Republicans as an effort to keep the powerful Nassau and Suffolk Republicans loyal.
        Some Republicans said yesterday that Mr. Mondello was in a position to engineer a coup to force out Mr. Bruno and elect Mr. Skelos as majority leader, but that it could easily backfire if Mr. Skelos could not corral the votes. Some county officials who spoke with their Republican senators predicted that Mr. Bruno would lose support if he were indicted or faced other legal action.
        But no one was openly forecasting that outcome.
        ''I would say Bruno is far, far safer than Ralph Marino, and he has my support and support from at least 99 percent of the chairs,'' said John DeSpirito III, the Republican leader in Onondaga County.
      