
        Confessions by two evangelical Christian ministers to having same-sex relationships could lead evangelicals to feel greater compassion toward gay men and lesbians, especially those in their congregations, some evangelical leaders said Tuesday.
        But none expected a broader re-examination of the belief, widely held by evangelicals, that homosexuality is sinful.
        On Sunday, the pastor of a suburban Denver church, the Rev. Paul Barnes, resigned after admitting to having had sex with men. Mr. Barnes said he had often cried himself to sleep, begging God to end his attraction to men.
        Mr. Barnes's departure came just a few weeks after that of the Rev. Ted Haggard, who had been president of the National Association of Evangelicals and senior pastor of New Life Church in Colorado Springs. A male prostitute said Mr. Haggard had had a relationship with him for three years.
        ''I honestly don't think there is significant rethinking on evangelical positions on homosexuality, but I think there may be greater compassion,'' said the Rev. Leith Anderson, president of the National Association of Evangelicals and senior pastor of Wooddale Church in Eden Prairie, Minn.
        ''Those who don't have homosexual inclinations can be judgmental towards those that do,'' Mr. Anderson said. ''When you discover people you know and respect are struggling with homosexuality, suddenly you're more compassionate because they are real people who are around you, members of your church and community, and the compassion level rises. It should.''
        The Rev. Dr. Tony Campolo, an American Baptist minister and a professor emeritus of sociology at Eastern University in Pennsylvania, said he was opposed to what he called ''same-gender eroticism.'' Dr. Campolo said that many evangelicals, influenced by Christian radio, had come to believe that homosexuality was largely a choice and that homosexuals ''choose to be evil.''
        Others, he said, subscribe to theories, now discredited by psychologists, that men become gay because they had a domineering mother or were victims of sexual abuse as children.
        ''People on Christian radio have portrayed gays as insatiable, promiscuous people, which they are not,'' Dr. Campolo said, ''and they describe gay people as fungus on society that must be exterminated.''
        Given the sadness many evangelicals say they feel for the former pastors, he added, ''what we're seeing here is a growing awareness among evangelicals that they have oversimplified, made false judgments and been very, very mean to the gay and lesbian community.''
        The Rev. H. B. London Jr., vice president for church and clergy at Focus on the Family, is part of the three-member team working with Mr. Haggard to restore the ''health and wellness'' of his family. Mr. London said he believed that homosexuality was a choice and that childhood trauma could make someone gay. But he urged that ''we have to stop whatever gay bashing there is.''
        Mr. London said he feared that the resignations of the two pastors could make people suspect all senior clergy members. ''When people see a priest or rabbi or pastor fail morally,'' he said, ''they begin to wonder if their pastor has a fault or weakness that might be discovered.''
        Evangelical pastors said it was too early to predict whether other ministers or laypeople struggling with homosexuality might feel more free to come forward.
        The Rev. Randy McCain, pastor of Open Door Community Church in Sherwood, Ark., a Little Rock suburb, started his evangelical church as an openly gay man, and many of his 120 congregants are gay or relatives of gay men and lesbians. Mr. McCain said he hoped the disclosures would shake the certainty many evangelicals had about homosexuality.
        But he said he doubted that other ministers would confess to same-sex attraction, because they could lose their churches and the lives they had built. He added that while leaders of large churches might hide their homosexuality, he had heard of many small churches like his where gay people were accepted, ''a ministry under the surface, and not on the radar screen.''
        ''I think that's the way God is moving, often under the radar,'' Mr. McCain said. ''It's like finding a baby in a manger: you don't expect to find God there. And it's like that when, say, the parents of some of our members come to our church.''
      