
        The NFL Network is looking silly. As a result, the chances of Rutgers fans in the New York-New Jersey area watching the Scarlet Knights play Kansas State in the Texas Bowl on Dec. 28 are dimming.
        Rather than show grace toward fans caught in a classic battle over money between cable operators and a sports channel, the NFL Network is pursuing a course that will only earn it enmity among potential customers.
        On Tuesday, the network briefly clambered to the moral high ground in a dispute in which the cable operators Time Warner and Cablevision have resisted making deals to carry it. The NFL Network offered them a free preview for the week that includes the Texas Bowl, but the proposal came only after nudging from Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey.
        But the preview offer came with a catch: it had to be carried on expanded basic, the most broadly available level of service on cable.
        Time Warner and Cablevision said no. Time Warner countered by offering to put the preview on its digital tier, which 75 percent of its 1.4 million customers receive, or to show the game coverage to all subscribers.
        Cablevision said it would let all its customers see the game in an offer that was conveyed to the news media, but not apparently to the network.
        Yesterday, the NFL Network turned down Time Warner's proposal, but a statement issued later in the day insisted it was not a rejection, but a path toward exploring ''options and alternatives.''
        Time Warner refused the NFL Network's demand that the game be carried on expanded basic, insisting that it lacked a vacant channel that could accommodate a weeklong tenant and saying that it could not legally replace an existing channel.
        But Steve Bornstein, the NFL Network's president, seems to believe that this lack of channel space cannot be true. In a letter sent Wednesday night to Glenn Britt, the chairman of Time Warner Cable, Bornstein wrote that his staff would identify alternatives that ''would not require you to drop or pre-empt full-time services that are not entirely within your company's control.''
        That suggets that Bornstein's staff knows Time Warner's channel deals better than Time Warner does, and that the cable operator could remove a channel it owns, such as the New York 1 news channel. Or maybe SportsNet New York, the Mets' channel, which Time Warner owns part of. Heck, it's the Mets' off-season, and SNY has no professional hockey or basketball.
        Bornstein's response underscores his drive to display his programming to 4.5 million customers who can't see it. He believes his network is so compelling that after a sampling, viewers will demand that Time Warner and Cablevision sign for good. Making the Rutgers bowl game more accessible in the school's home market seems to be a minor concern.
        The best solution is to merge the Time Warner options into one: Let every cable subscriber see the game and put the rest of the week on digital. If the NFL Network accepts that, we will know that it cares more, in the short term, for Rutgers fans than about a week's worth of marketing.
        Bornstein's free preview idea invites some analysis. The preview period is too long, about twice that of the three- or four-day versions that HBO and Showtime have run.
        More important, those previews occupy channels already designed for those premium channels and do not usurp the places of other networks.
        While Bornstein has decreed that his preview must run on expanded basic, the NFL Network has digital-tier deals with Comcast and Cox.
        So why spurn Time Warner's digital option?
        In his letter, Bornstein looks to be a consumer hero, writing that he will explore Time Warner's proposal to carry his network on digital if subscribers do not have to spend anything extra on equipment or to switch to the digital tier for the preview. That's a kindly thought. Who wants a free preview that isn't free?
        But it suggests a situation in which football-crazed fans will besiege Time Warner's phone lines for digital service -- for just one week's preview -- and new cable boxes will actually be delivered and installed on time.
        Bornstein has turned the flap over who will not be able to watch Rutgers play Kansas State (nearly 70 percent of New Jersey homes don't receive the NFL Network) into a maneuver to accelerate his deal-making with Time Warner and Cablevision. That is his prerogative. But he could not have capitalized on the situation if Rutgers were not bound for the Texas Bowl.
        Perhaps local fans should feel lucky that Lautenberg's pressure at least forced Bornstein to offer the preview, even in its state of jeopardy. No such offer was made to Time Warner's system in Kansas City, about 120 miles from the Kansas State campus. Are those fans unworthy?
        TV SPORTS E-Mail: sportsbiz@nytimes.com
      