
        Mystery still envelopes the poisoning by radioactivity of Alexander V. Litvinenko, the former K.G.B. officer who died in London on Nov. 23. Above all the question of who might have poisoned him.
        The attention of investigators and of Mr. Litvinenko's family and associates has fallen on three Russians who visited London on Nov. 1, the day he fell ill. Two of them met Andrei K. Lugovoi and Dmitri V. Kovtun, both former security agents now in business met with him at the Pine Bar in the Millennium Hotel, where Mr. Litvinenko is believed to have ingested the radioactive isotope, polonium 210, that killed him.
        They deny it. And much remains unclear. But most of the publicly known details of that meeting and of the men themselves has come from an interview the three of them granted to the radio station Ekho Moskvy on Nov. 24, the day after he died and accused President Vladimir V. Putin of complicity in what purported to be a deathbed statement. Mr. Lugovoi and Mr. Kovtun are now in a Moscow hospital, reportedly being treated for exposure to polonium. Both have been questioned by Russian and British investigators.
        What follows is a transcript of the complete interview conducted before investigators in Germany found traces of polonium in several places Mr. Kovtun visited in or near Hamburg before flying to London on Nov. 1 as translated by Michael Schwirtz and Nikolai Khalip of the Moscow Bureau of The New York Times.
        Natella Boltyanskaya, an anchor: Today we have with us Andrei Lugovoi, former F.S.B. [Federal Security Service, the domestic successor of the Soviet K.G.B.] officer, and his friends and business partners, Vyacheslav Sokolenko and Dmitri Kovtun. All three met with Alexander Litvinenko. Hello.
        Olga Bychkova, also an anchor: These are the people who met with Alexander Litvinenko on November 1, when he was allegedly poisoned. On the next day he felt sick and then spent three weeks in serious condition in the hospital. Late yesterday evening Alexander Litvinenko died in a London hospital. It is still unclear what happened. It is known that he was poisoned, though what poisoned him is a mystery. There are also different theories about who poisoned him. As for who benefited from his, there are still a million other strange theories.
        Boltyanskaya: All three people in our studio in some way figure in the case.
        Lugovoi: I would like to draw your attention to the fact that there is no one named Vladimir [A reference to reports in the British press of a mysterious Russian figure who met Mr. Litvinenko that day]. There have been very many insinuations in the last week associated with some non-existent Vladimir with a strong-featured face. They probably meant Dmitri, who differs markedly from that description. That is why we are striving--and myself in particular--to answer fully, all questions that arise. I would like to begin, however, by saying that, hearing of Alexander's death, I would like to express my condolences and sympathy for his family and friends. I can say that as far as we are concerned--and we are already taking actions in this regard--we will try to construct a timeline of events and help to explain the situation, as, in my opinion, it relates to today's situation.
        Boltyanskaya: Andrei, if you please, the first question has been submitted in some form or another by very many of our listeners. You are a former officer of the F.S.B. Who are you?
        Lugovoi: Let's speak for a moment about who I am. I did not serve one day in the F.S.B. First of all, I am from a military family and am a ranking officer. I graduated from the Moscow Academy of the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Federation, which, in Soviet times, was perhaps the most elite academy. It was for Kremlin Cadets and so forth. It was a military academy of the Ministry of Defense. In 1987 I was commissioned for service in the Ninth Department of the K.G.B. of the U.S.S.R. The F.S.B. and the K.G.B. had different structures. I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the Ninth Department was responsible for providing security to high-ranking government officials and did not engage in operational work. Moreover, in the span of five years, I was first a platoon commander and then commander of an academic company of the Kremlin regiment. I worked on combat actions, and there were up to 140 young, 18-yeah-old soldiers under my command. And in 1991, after a famous event--I mean the coup--I was moved to the subdivision of personal security in the Main Protection Directorate of the already renamed K.G.B. Until my discharge in 1996, I served in the Main Security Directorate, which was again renamed the Federal Protection Service, guaranteeing the security of high-ranking government officials.
        Q Andrei, in your opinion, is Litvinenko a traitor who broke an oath?
        Lugovoi I would not speak that harshly because no investigation had been conducted from the point of view of treason or breach of oath. I know that his work was investigated, and he received a suspended sentence for some crimes, though I don't really know what crimes. Then he left the country. Whether he was really a traitor or not I do not know because, as far as I know, no investigations, let alone any judicial acts were conducted or pronounced in connection to his case. Unlike those who left earlier
        Q O.K., and what do you do now, Andrei?
        Lugovoi - I am in business.
        Q What business?
        Lugovoi Well, I am the owner, one of the owners of the biggest Russian factory that makes kvas, sbiten [both are traditional Russian beverages] and mead. The factory is in the Ryazan region, the trade mark is Pershin. I am sure those who have tried our kvas liked it. The factory is new. We also make wines. This is my main business now. It's a big enterprise, 50 thousand square meters, 500 workers.
        Q What were the parameters of that meeting, of your partnership with Mr. Litvinenko?
        Lugovoi The parameters were very simple. I have not finished speaking about my businesses, though, I may return to this later. As to the parameters of our partnership, they are very simple. We were knew each other for 10 years, though before he emigrated our relationship was not more than just an acquaintanceship. There were no business or personal relations. He socialized with Boris Berezovsky [Russian tycoon living in exile in London] and I worked as the chief of the security service for the Public Russian TV, where Berezovsky was the main shareholder, so naturally I met him occasionally.
        Then he left the country. We had no contacts and no communication. But about a year ago he called me and that was an absolutely unexpected call. He asked whether I visit London. I go there fairly often. Only this year I was there 12, 13 times. He suggested meeting during my next visit, which we did. He told me that he was prepared to introduce me to some British companies due to ethical reasons I would prefer not to name them which were interested in investing into the Russian economy and coming into Russia's market.
        When I told him what I was doing he thought I could be useful to these people. Indeed, during this year I have had dialogue with a number of well-known and respected companies that have shown interest in Russia. I had already developed an interest in Britain. Actually, our relations went as follows: during my visits he accompanied me in meetings with these partners because he thought he could also make some money and because, I assume, he wanted to try business for himself.
        Q What was Alexander Litvinenko up to?
        Lugovoi I have no idea what he was doing except what I talked about with him. Also, it must be clear that despite the fact that, as it seems to me, within the last two or three years not too much was heard about him probably he was already Nevertheless, some scandalous tail always followed him. I tried not to exceed the framework of business contacts in our relationship.
        Q You mean you did not ask any personal questions?
        Lugovoi - I did not ask him any personal questions and he did not bother me either, to tell you the truth.
        Q What do you think was the source of the story that allegedly Litvinenko himself named you in connection with what had happened?
        Lugovoi This is what I can tell you. Yesterday I had meetings with a number of foreign agencies, I also spoke with the Kommersant newspaper. So in actual fact yesterday I was quite clearly sayingbasically I would like to say the following: I am sure that he named my name, undoubtedly, but I do not think, I am almost sure, that he in no way associated me with the poisoning. I will explain why. And, please, don't interrupt me.
        The thing is that we met on the 1st of November and agreed to meet again on the 2nd. At 8:30 on November 2nd he called me, we were supposed to meet at 10 a.m. in one of the companies. He called me and said: ''Andrei, you know, I suddenly got sick, something is with my stomach. I am spitting out my guts. I don't think I'll be able to make the meeting.'' Since we agreed not to take an interpreter I told him: ''it would be difficult for me without you. Let us postpone the meeting.'' So we agreed to postpone the meeting to a later date.
        Then he called me on the 2nd in the evening and confirmed that he did not get any better. Since I talked with him earlier and he knew that my wife and I were planning to go to Madrid after the 20th for tourist purposes, he said: ''You know I have a good friend of mine, a business partner in Madrid, I frequent the place. And, you know, I think it wouldn't hurt if I introduce you to him, he also is interested in having some contacts in Russia.'' I said, fine. We agreed to contact and specify the date of the meeting.
        I called him on the 7th. He was in the hospital already. His wife took the phone when I called, she gave him the receiver and we spoke for some time. I asked about his health and he said he had been unconscious for two days and said he thought he had probably been poisoned. I would say that when we spoke on the 7th he was not as categorical about it as he was later. He also said that he felt a little better and he hoped to be out of hospital in the next few days. But I told him that the dates of my trip were not clear because my wife had to renew her Schengen visa [required for visitors to most countries of the European Union] for the Spain visit; her visa expired. So we agreed to contact again in week's time.
        I called him on the 13th after he already made the statement and all these declarations regarding Italy started circulating in the press. I mean this Italian, I won't mention his name, I am not sure I remember it right.
        Q Scaramella
        Lugovoi Yes, we talked with him. Again his wife took the phone. She recognized me and gave him the phone right away. We spoke for about two minutes. His voice was thick. He said he was sure he had been poisoned because the symptoms he developed in his opinion could indicate only that.
        Q Did he mention something specifically?
        Lugovoi He did not describe the symptoms. He said that ''something is happening to me that is quite unexpected.'' I asked what, because, as I said, I was planning to fly to Spain on November 23. The visa was supposed to be ready before the end of the week, by the 17th. He said: ''You know, I may pull through only by December, if I make it. May be you can go in December.'' This is the conversation we had. I said, ''Well, I don't know, let's get in touch later.''
        So, in that period when he was already sick, when Scaramella's name was circulating actively, as I was said in questions to the western press today, I heard people saying, ''Your name popped up.'' I assert categorically, and am prepared to prove it, that Alexander and myself and his family and his circle and all who met with him knew perfectly well that I met him on the 1st after he had a meeting with Scaramella. And they knew where we met. However, for three weeks, until he was taken to intensive care, nobody mentioned it.
        Q Why?
        Lugovoi I don't know. When he was taken to the hospital, - as I said - to intensive care, proceeding from what I saw in the reports. And my name emerged right away and so on I must say that when he and I were talking, it was a normal, ordinary conversation. Nobody blamed anyone. He did not mention it at all.
        Q When he spoke with you from the hospital?
        Lugovoi When he was in the hospital. When I spoke with him on the 7th and 13th after he made the statement. If I am not mistaken it was exactly on Monday the 20th when my name emerged. I think in your program, too. I arrived to Moscow late that afternoon. I was away and flew back from Yerevan [capital of Armenia]. I arrived around 7 or 8 p.m. right after landing I received a call and was told that my name was associated I went to my office and looked through the wires. The next morning I met with my partners and lawyers for advice. The next morning, on Tuesday, I immediately got in touch with the British Embassy and in a telephone conversation suggested we should have a meeting in order to clarify the developing events to the maximum. They called back, said O.K., fine. We agreed, and they set the time: Thursday, 2 p.m. I have taken the following stand
        Q You mean, it was Yesterday
        Lugovoi Right, it was yesterday
        Q Have you had this meeting?
        Lugovoi Yes, and it was very constructive.
        Q Are you satisfied?
        Lugovoi Absolutely. And I have taken the following stand: I am not going to make any clarifications until I clarify the situation to the British embassy. I emphasize, I don't ever use the word ''explanations.'' I say clarification of the situation, because on Tuesday various agencies, Russian and foreign media outlets started calling me. I told them, dear friends, at 2 p.m. I will meet representatives of the British embassy and after that I am prepared to make statements. Which is what actually happened.
        Q You haven't yet spoken with the British police?
        Lugovoi We met, together with Dmitri, a lawyer was with us. It was an informal meeting because there were no legal grounds. We wrote a statement
        Q So, it was a conversation?
        Lugovoi Right, three high ranking embassy officials were present. We handed in our statements. They gave us papers for what they received from us. And they said, ''We'll contact you sometime today. We are very glad you contacted us because the interest in this case is great, especially in the media and we cannot ignore it.'' Today we have gotten in touch with them to plan a meeting. I wouldn't like to discuss what we agreed on because we have agreed that we shall not comment on our discussions. I will not do it. Dmitri will support me.
        Q Then, Andrei may I ask you and your colleagues a question? You are the people who know a thing or two in the security business, aren't you?
        Lugovoi By all means.
        Q What are the main issues in connection with the Litvinenko case, and with you?
        Lugovoi My questions are very simple. Actually, two names are associated with this case: only those who met on November 1. As a person who knows something about security, my questions would have been but I think the British Scotland Yard is professional enough, but it is necessary to track down all contacts he had, not only within the last month, but during the last six or even 12 months. This is the main thing to start with. To track down all mobile phones, connections, the presence of a number in this or that cell, including those on the territory of Russia and England. Movements around town, press appearances, calls from Russia, other countries, Spain, London, Moscow.
        Q You mean that the very fact of the poisoning by the way, you don't question it, do you? could have happened much earlier, at any other moment in time.
        Lugovoi I tell you what. I am a person who has had some dealings with the justice system, therefore I will put it this way: from the legal point of view one can speak about poisoning only if it has been diagnosed by a doctor or expertise was conducted and conclusions drawn. That is when it is confirmed. As far as I know as I was driving from my office I was listening to the news doctors made statements to the effect that, true they are surprised that it developed so fast, but they did not confirm the fact of poisoning.
        Q Do you have any other feasible theory on that score?
        Lugovoi I don't know. First of all I wasn't anywhere next to him, I could not watch the course.
        Q But you are a security expert
        Lugovoi - Wait a minute. I can quote heaps of instances from my personal practice when my, pardon me, close acquaintances and relatives found themselves in situations which also set people wondering just because of health problems.
        Q Andre, thank you. Now a question for Dmitri. Your impressions during your meeting with Alexander Litvinenko?
        Kovtun Completely ordinary.
        Q You were not acquainted with him before then?
        Kovtun I had been acquainted with him since October 16.
        Q That is literally two weeks.
        Kovtun Andrei introduced us. We flew into London and I went about my business. I also have a business.
        Q Tell us about yourself, please.
        Kovtun My name is Dmitri Kovtun, not Vladimir. No one ever went by the name Vladimir. I was very surprised to hear of myself referred to as such. I graduated from the Moscow Officers' Academy also in 1986.
        Lugovoi We graduated together. We also lived for 12 years in the same building and our fathers served together in the Ministry of Defense.
        Kovtun I graduated a year earlier from a military academy. Then I served in Czechoslovakia and in Germany. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, I remained in Germany and lived there 12 years with relative difficulty. I was married to a German until recently. I have a residence permit in Germany and frequently travel abroad.
        Q And you also had a business in Germany?
        Kovtun No, I don't have a business in Germany. It is now in Russia.
        Q -- And what do you do?
        Kovtun -- Consulting. I help western companies enter into the Russian market.
        Q: And why were interested in Alexander Litvinenko?
        Kovtun -- He had serious contacts with serious English companies that desired to aggressively enter the Russian market but had experienced difficulty in doing so.
        Q -- And you were prepared to help?
        Kovtun Yes. We met on October 16, when we flew into London, and in particular, had a meeting with him and with Andrei. And we visited the offices of two very serious English companies.
        Q - Tell me please, did Alexander Litvinenko seem like he was a person who feared for his life?
        Kovtun -- You know, he had a certain flare of paranoia, of course, but nothing more.
        Q -- What was that? Explain. I do not understand.
        Kovtun -- There was a little nervousness, some tension in his actions.
        Q -- Andrei, was this always the case, or only on this day?
        Lugovoi -- I would say so. Dmitri met with him twice, and until then had never seen or heard of him. We had never met, and I did not even forewarn him that there would be another person. I did not tell Alexander because Dmitri arrived and we had joint projects with companies that were not connected with Alexander. Before the meeting, I called Alexander and said, ''You know, one more partner will be with me. You don't have any reservations?'' Then he said, ''Well, maybe I won't attend then, because of course, for that'' That is, he treated contacts from Russia with caution. He indirectly agreed to go along with it. Although after a year of communication, he, of course, told me about a few stories that were in the press earlier. Very rarely, but still.
        Q: And you mean
        Lugovoi: Stories when someone was with some kind of pen, with ink. I don't really remember now.
        Q: Now, you understood who that person was--Alexander Litvinenko. From the press, from somewhere
        Lugovoi Of course I understood. Absolutely. But I repeat that when I met him the first time, I was not very sure if he could really make me a serious proposal. I was acquainted with him, I was in London, and he came himself to my hotel, I remember.
        Q: So, you doubted the seriousness of his connections
        Lugovoi: Yes, absolutely. But, when he took me from one company to another and I gave those companies to the British Embassy, I assure you, that if I were to name these companies and what they did abroad and in which countries, it would cause a sensation. But for now I won't do that.
        Q: We still have to ask Vyacheslav Sokolenko about what he does, and in detail to describe his meeting on November 1 and what happened after. Please.
        Sokolenko: I am also a graduate of the academy of the Supreme Soviet.
        Lugovoi: We are all from one
        Q: You are all from the same class?
        Sokolenko: No, I am three years younger. And now there is this company, a group of companies, ''The Ninth Wave.'' It's fairly well known. It is in the security field. That is, I work in physical security. There are several protection companies. And I, well, in truth, did not take part in the meeting. I arrived with Andrei--it was planned for a while--I'm a big fan of CSKA [a professional soccer team from Moscow]. And we came for soccer. And when there was that meeting, my wife, kids and I went on an excursion. It was before the match and we met in the hotel, already, it seems, after the meeting had ended. And, then we went to the soccer match. I was in Paris, and in Lisbon for the final. It's my hobby.
        Q: So, you did not meet with Litvinenko on November 1.
        Sokolenko: No, we did not meet. The only thing we did was greet each other, but honestly, I did not even think at that moment that he was Alexander Litvinenko.
        Q: Okay. And what kind of impression has the whole story made on you?
        Sokolenko: For me it's been completely ridiculous.
        Q: What does that mean?
        Sokolenko: That my colleagues have heard my name in the papers. That is, I learned three days ago that I had met with Litvinenko. I was far way from all this. I was there for soccer and that's it.
        Q: You also should understand the danger. And tell me please, do you also think that Litvinenko was not necessarily poisoned, and, instead, perhaps, had the flu.
        Sokolenko: Absolutely.
        Q: What kind of theories do you have?
        Sokolenko: I don't have any theories, because, just like Andrei said, there has been no conclusion, not a legal one, none. I cannot comment on anything.
        Q: Andrei, a question, if you please. How do you view the development of the situation. You have emphasized several times that all that you can do, you have done. You met with the British, and you revealed your face to the world. You have shown that you are prepared to cooperate. What do you think, how far with the situation develop?
        Lugovoi: I'll say this, the ball is in the British court. We are in contact with one another. I am waiting for their phone call, and they promised to call closer to the end of the day or on Monday. So, we have been in contact. We are defining our positions. They are defining their positions and I am defining mine with my lawyer. Everything will move forward in this way.
        Q -- What do you think? Are you able to discern movements towards the search of truth from formalities conducted to maintain order?
        Lugovoi -- You know, this is always a complicated question because it is difficult to understand formalities. Formalities sometimes lead to truth. That's why, for three weeks, many have made suggestions regarding certain gentlemen that I would have called simply crazy.
        Q: What do you mean?
        Lugovoi: I would not like to comment. And several others have attempted to capitalize on this tragedy. These people don't present anything other than idle gossip to the rest of the world. That's all.
        Q: You are speaking about whom now?
        Lugovoi: I don't want to comment. I will comment on it, though.
        Q: Okay. Can you explain the incomprehensible story with the Italian, Scaramella, the one who allegedly revealed a document with a list, linking this case with the Politkovskaya case? How does this relate, do you think?
        Lugovoi: Honestly I don't know. Really. I did not know that he met with some Italian. It was on his initiative that we meet on November 1. I don't remember. I named a time, and he said that he couldn't make it because he had a meeting with an Italian. That's what he said. I said, well, how about a half an hour later. Then he came, and I didn't ask anything else. And then when the publication came out, I saw the Italian Scaramella and Politkovskaya.
        Q -- Andrei, tell me please, do you have your own personal theory about what happened to Alexander Litvinenko?
        Lugovoi: No, I don't have a theory.
        Q: So, not the slightest?
        Q And you, Dmitri?
        Kovtun: Without I doubt I've thought about it. But I for one, have had doings with the justice system, and cautiously watch my every utterance. I don't want to just dive in and read the coffee grounds.
        Q Do you think that some measures could be taken to try and influence what you know?
        Kovtun: This has been going on already, since Monday. There have been steps, I would say, on be half of the British, mostly the media, which
        Q -- They are asking you questions?
        Kovtun: They are asking questions, but when they ask questions, there is no pressure. The pressure starts in the commentary that is not associated with me. Although whoever needed to was able to get a hold of me. I am, incidentally, surprised that Ekho Moskvy, the first Russian media outlet to speak about it, has not prompted me to leave.
        Q: As a result, you are here.
        Sokolenko [Ekho Moskvy initially attributed this statement to Kovtun, but Sokolenko said it was his] -- Although, your host, Mr. Sergei L. Dorenko [one of the station's anchors] has been one of our clients at The Ninth Wave group of companies for about seven years. We protect him. We have an official agreement with him. He was able to connect us with different companies on Monday. As for why Ekho Moskvy has approached this situation so calmly, who knows?
        Q: That is a different story. I'd like to ask another question. You said that you have no theories. But, many have asked whether Alexander Litvinenko was important enough in the Russian intelligence service to be a major liability to the F.S.B., and, thus warrant assassination. Or, as others have said, he was too small a fry and it would be stupid to say he was involved in such an operation.
        Kovtun: Probably either-or. For one, when he served in a subdivision of the F.S.B., he served, as I understand, in a subdivision not connected with the work of the special services in the sphere of intelligence and counterintelligence. He worked on organized crime as I understand. Special subdivisions were created for the eradication of criminal organizations. That's why, in my opinion--true I'm not that familiar with the activities of these subdivisions--but they worked more on organized crime. There were some state secrets involved, but I'm not very sure. Any intelligence agent, already within the service, however, knows certain secrets. Because there are contacts, addresses, the arrangements of subdivisions, and telephone numbers.
        Q: Okay, there may be different levels of secrets.
        Kovtun: That's why, you understand, not one, not the other. I would not say, probably, I would not call him a small fry because he participated in different operations. If we remember, in the mid-1990s the oligarch wars were in fashion. First the oligarchs united then they were in conflict and over and over.
        Q: Andrei, what do you think? For whom was it advantageous to make you look guilty or like a suspect.
        Lugovoi: That don't know? There was a question yesterday about whether it was advantageous for the Kremlin. How it was advantageous for the Kremlin, I don't know. May be it was advantageous for Boris Abramovich [Berezovsky, the self-exiled tycoon in London] because as far as I know, members of his family still appeal to us with questions on security. We don't work only on the territory of Russia.
        Q: That's self advertisement. And now, for whom was it advantageous? You named two figures.
        Lugovoi: And why are people only speaking of two?
        Q -- Do you have a third?
        Lugovoi: I don't know. I basically just don't want to comment. I work in business; politics is not in my profile.
        Q: Natalya from Moscow [a listener] writes that, supposedly Moscow News said that British police tried to find and question Andrei Lugovoi, but they were not able because he had left England. Can you explain this story?
        Lugovoi: I'll explain. Yes, there was information that after the meeting with Litvinenko, Andrei and Vladimir left London.
        Q: That's Dmitri, who is seated here.
        Lugovoi: On October 31, Vyacheslav, my family and I--I have three children, two daughters and a son. The daughters are grown and my son is 8 years old--left Moscow. Dmitri flew from Hamburg the next morning. We came to tour London; two of my three children had never been. We arrived and went to the hotel. On the first we went to the soccer match, and once there, we did notwe did not go anywhere, we didn't hide. I emphasize that we were there on the 31st, the 1st, when Alexander was allegedly poisoned, the 2nd and the 3rd only until lunch and then we left. So no one hid. As for the British police and how they could have located us, Litvinenko had all of our phone numbers. Our phone numbers are also at the office of Boris Abramovich. They could have leftI thinkComrade Goldfarb (Alexander Goldfarb, associate of Berezovsky and Litvinenko] could have found the phone numbers. He is a very curious figure, incidentally.
        Q: Given the repeated charges directed at the F.S.B., has anyone from the Russian government structures come to see you?
        Lugovoi: Is it difficult for you guys to say if you've been visited by Russian government officials? I haven't.
        Kovtun: No one has visited me.
        Lugovoi: No one from the Federal Security Service, not from the Prosecutor General's Office, or from the militia has called.
        Q: This was after Nov. 1. And before, when you spoke with Alexander Litvinenko, and you had joint business ventures. All of you, in one way or another, were related to the intelligence services. What has been said to you about that?
        Lugovoi: About what?
        Q: About your contact with Litvinenko.
        Lugovoi: As regards my contacts, no one has ever asked, and few knew. And I'm not one to even cover up or not cover up. I did not discuss it with anybody. It was my business. Moreover, I repeat, that our meetings were of a purely business character. If we had a meeting, we met for 10-15 minutes before, and then the meeting was with Britons. Because Alexander was very active, he translated some questions. He had studied English for five, six years already. So, we met, discussed, and then in England I had a mass of other affairs. And if I came with my wife, then there were things to do in London.
        Q: Please tell us anyway about the last meeting on Nov. 1. How did it go?
        Lugovoi: It went very simply. I met with Dmitri alone on Nov. 1 to discuss our project, far, by the way, from the hotel. I spoke with Alexander; he knew that I was arriving. The only thing I don't remember is who called whom first on the morning of 1st. I told him: ''Listen, we'll meet today, and then I have a soccer match. I'm with my family.'' Before the soccer match, there were other plans: to eat, chat with our football group, to have some down time. That's when all the gentlemen gather to drink beer, whiskey and gin. We did this for a third time after the game. He insisted: ''Let's meet today, anyway, because there we need to talk.'' I said: ''Okay, but only in the hotel, and not for long.'' After the meeting I arrived with Dmitri and called from the road because we expected him to be in the hotel already. I arrived a few minutes early and sat. We ordered ourselves something to drink. We did not order anything to eat. We ordered some kind of alcoholic beverage, gin or something. He called and said he had arrived. I believe I even went to the vestibule to meet him, and we sat.
        Boltyanskaya: You don't remember now?
        Lugovoi: I can't say exactly. You know, I simply wrote to the British Embassy that I thought there were video cameras in the hotel and proposed that they first take a look at them, so that there would be fewer questions. We sat, and spoke for about 20 to 30 minutes. I am absolutely sure, I can confirm one hundred percent that he did not order anything, and we did not offer him anything.
        Q: He did not eat anything during the meeting?
        Lugovoi: And we didn't eat anything. My family was on a tour with Vyacheslav and we expected them to arrive, change into warmer clothes. And after, we planned, at around 5-6 p.m. to eat before the soccer match. And we ate, incidentally, on Piccadilly Circus in one of the steak houses, and then left. That's why I can say that he did not order anything, and we did not pour him anything. Personally, though I cannot remember the details. We will, however without a doubt analyze this meeting sufficiently, when we meet with the British police. That is very important.
        Q: If it was all so simple, why do you need to analyze it?
        Lugovoi: They will probably ask us which table we sat at, who sat where. I should say that during the meeting, my 8-year-old son ran up to me and I introduced him to Alexander. We stood, chatted and joked. And then we left together, and I think my wife was there. She knew Alexander, and they greeted one another. We agreed to.... Yes, he came at any rate and we didn't really speak thoroughly. That's why he asked for a meeting the next day at 10:00 a.m. I told him: ''Sash, you can tell me on the phone and we'll agree.'' The next day he called me at 7:30 AM. I had just woken up. And he said--I already told you.
        Q: Tell me please, is it known today whether he delivered the supposed pre-death statement?
        Lugovoi: Yes.
        Q: That is a pretty short answer considering the statement. There was practically a kind of damnation here and a pardon of the Russian authorities and of President Putin.
        Lugovoi: Yes.
        Q: Which one of you insistently requested Litvinenko to drink tea? Andrei from Moscow [a listener] asked that question.
        Sokolenko: I'll answer that question. It was asked in connection with a claim by a publication I read, that Vladimir insistently requested Litvinenko to drink tea. Nobody actively offered him anything. Now I don't remember, though it is fully possible that we asked him to order something, and he declined. As usual, we can't, sit , drink, someone arrives
        Kovtun: He was an exception in that he didn't drink alcohol. I felt a bit uncomfortable when we both met and had dinner. By the way, on October 16, when we met we had dinner and on the 17th we had dinner together two weeks before this in China town. I remember that we at least drank. We came and went to the toilet and elsewhere. And he also got up. It was constant movement and it was always a bit uncomfortable. That's why he never ordered anything to drink. Even wine, even beer.
        Q: Andrei, if there had been a moment when you were with him, and he was trailed, people were following him, would you have noticed. You know, again
        Lugovoi: Understand. Just because I am a specialist, does that mean that I should look around everywhere?
        Q: It's professional.
        Lugovoi: One minute. Professional could mean that there are some things that I do for no reason. I, let's say, in restaurants, if you're interested, never sit with my back to the entrance for some reason.
        Q: And Litvinenko?
        Lugovoi: I didn't pay attention. I'm telling you that you need to understand what kind of meetings these were. A normal meeting went like this: We would meet in the hotel, he would arrive and we would talk in the lobby. Or, we would meethe often scheduled meetings around Oxford Street at the Nike store, and we would meet. That is a busy place, around the metro entrance. He often arrived on the metro. I often went on foot because it was not far from the hotels. Also, the offices of two British companies were located in that region. It's like in the Garden Ring or the Boulevard Ring in Moscow. Completely close. It was easier to walk there than to drive.
        Q: So you didn't pay attention?
        Lugovoi: Yes, you could say that. There is, was sothere is such an atmosphere there
        Q: You did not pay attention, your eyes did not dart around, and you didn't see anything?
        Lugovoi: One minute. I did not not see anything. I felt simply that in London life was safe, and God willing, we could have that in Moscow sometime. That's why I know very many and met with very well-to-do people that in Russia, in Moscow, would use a huge amount of security, a motorcade, and a lead car. In London they ride in a Taxi or drive themselves, or in the best case, they have a driver. They are all freely dressed and calmly move about.
        Q: Kirill from Moscow [a listener] sent a whole pack of questions: about the conversation, about what he wanted to ask immediately, about who left earlier, him or you all, about whether he followed you or whether you left earlier.
        Lugovoi: That comrade obviously did not listen to what I said. For one, I never said what he said, that there was a need to meet immediately. He said, ''I would like to meet with you today, anyway.''
        Q: And why? If you said yourself that it was impossible by telephone. Do you have an explanation?
        Lugovoi: I don't have an explanation. I don't think there is a need to quibble over the fact. I think that if I insisted that the meeting were on a certain day, and he wanted to meet, there would have been some kind of time. I told him further: ''We will be in the hotel during that time. If it is convenient for you at another time then let's postpone the meeting until tomorrow.''
        Q: I have a question for you, Dmitri. Do you ever get to know a person with whom you might enter into a business partnership--what he says, I can do this and this, at this point only words? By what parameters do you evaluate a potential partner, and in particular, Alexander Litvinenko?
        Kovtun: Regarding Alexander particularly, I met with him, we introduced ourselves and in 15 minutes we were already in the office of a serious company and talked there.
        Q: That was sufficient?
        Kovtun: Of course.
        Lugovoi: I should say that I had already conducted negotiations with that company, and put a word in for Dmitri. At that point, personally speaking, Alexander did not have a role.
        Q: And what kind of British company was it? A financial one or
        Lugovoi: I would not like toI have been in contact with them, I am ready
        Q: I would like to offer the following question. This statement, which he made before his death, when he brought up the name Vladimir Putin and so fourth, does it reflect some other sphere of his activities, a part of his life that is connected with his escape, his exile, with politics? What do you think about that?
        Lugovoi: About what, exactly?
        Boltyanskaya: About that side of his life.
        Q: About the fact that he was engaged in action directed against the official Russian authorities in a political sense?
        Lugovoi: You know, we have had many different events and changes in Russia in the last 15 years. I consider all this inventively.
        Q: I don't understand.
        Lugovoi: I never really understood why he did this. I would not have done it. I don't have the kind of disposition to engage in this type of thing. I did not even consider it; I didn't care.
        Q: But in your opinionwhy did he do this? You should be able to develop some kind of an idea.
        Lugovoi: I don't know. Why did the wives of Decembrists [19th century revolutionaries who revolted against Czar Nicholas I and were executed or exiled to Siberia, many followed by their wives] go along with their husbands?
        Q: That's an answer?
        Lugovoi: Because they loved each other and so fourth. It seems he had his own positions, and those positions were intertwined with events taking place in Russia that, in his opinion, did not add up.
        Q: Would you not admit that his political views and actions might in some way have said something about the business that you considered him to have?
        Lugovoi: For one thing, in the last two years or year I have not heard one statement from him. And furthermore, when we met, I specifically told him, Sasha, if any of these companies has a mind to start some kind of corresponding movement, I'll have to discuss this with you.
        Q: Tatyana [a listener] has a question: ''You have had long-term contacts with a person who had been monitored by the Russian intelligence services. You must have known this.''
        Lugovoi: And it would be interesting to know how those intelligence services monitored his contacts. I don't know. No one ever asked me any questions. I don't think you need to hegemonize our intelligence services. And other thing, to listen to individual leaders you get the feeling that Russia is chasing after everyone, that everyone is monitored wherever they go. That's stupid. I can guarantee you that.
        Q: Wait, you told him that, that this was a question you considered? You asked him that question? What did he say?
        Lugovoi: I told him that. It wasn't a question.
        Q: What does that mean, ''It wasn't a question?''
        Lugovoi: We will discuss it. We still haven't discussed it.
        Q: So you requested that he leave politics to the periphery of your mutual activities?
        Lugovoi: I did not ask him anything. I told him only one thing: ''Sash, you should understand one important thing. In the case that you realize one of the proposals that you are attempting to realize, you should, in principle, perhaps define what it is you are doing in this life.''
        Q: Why did you tell him that?
        Q: So you proposed that he make a decision?
        Lugovoi: Why did I say this to him? Because, first of all, he had earlier made some very serious statements. He formally--although as I said there had been no court processes connected with his departure from Russia, with whether or not he was a traitor or not--but formally anything could have been. But, what business would like any tinge of criminality or the presence of criminal affairs, and so fourth? This is not from the point of view of politics, but from the point of view of a criminal act. That is why any Western company that begins to conduct business with someone and realizes that there is some problem with the law, this is not good. This is in any country. As everyone knows, I had similar problems in 2002 when I spent a year and two months in Lefortovo [notorious prison in Moscow, where Lugovoi sat awaiting trial on charges of helping a criminal defendant escape from a hospital the year before] and I had difficulties.
        Q: For what?
        Lugovoi: I allegedly helped Glushkov [Nikolai A. Glushkov, a former Aeroflot executive tried and convicted for embezzlement] escape from custody.
        Q: A question from Andrei from Moscow [a listener] for Dmitri: ''You met and in 10 minutes you were in a serious British company and met with serious people without a prior agreement, even if only for a few days? Ha-ha-ha.''
        Lugovoi: Stop! I'll comment on this. That was a question for me, excuse me. For one, that person probably has a problem with his ear because to doesn't work right. I'm sorry, but that's what I have to say. I again explain that I met with that company before this meeting two or three times. Dmitri is my business partner. Because we had already spoken, and Dmitri flew in for our other project, I decided to introduce him to this company. Alexander did not introduce him, young man, Andrei, we were together. I invited Dmitri. Dmitri only knew that and when we sat and talked, he already understood what we were talking about. We met for 15 minutes, I introduced him to Alexander and then, I think, we walked to the company. We were met by a person I already knew, who, by the way, spoke excellent Russian. We negotiated with him for about 45 minutes perhaps, maybe even an hour. We exchanged opinions and agreed.
        Q: But you personally conducted
        Lugovoi: Alexander.
        Q: I wanted to ask the following question: Information appeared concerning the last days of Alexander Litvinenko's life, that he--it is strange information--converted to Islam. Do you know anything about this?
        Lugovoi: Nothing at all. He never once spoke about religion.
        Q: He didn't inform you about that?
        Lugovoi: This is the first I've heard of it.
        Q: Speak about Alexander Litvinenko's family, about what is happening to them now.
        Lugovoi: I saw him with his wife only one time. I never saw his son. I met them at a public function in London. I don't want to say what the event was. We were introduced there.
        Q: Why don't you want to speak about that?
        Lugovoi: And further
        Q -- But why don't you want to speak about it?
        Lugovoi: Well, I just don't want to.
        Q: A public event about which you do not want to speak. Continue.
        Lugovoi: Do not try to strip me of everything. Give me the possibility to, actually, a little
        Q: You have body armor there, Andrei. Continue.
        Lugovoi: We saw each other one time. We are acquaintances. She is a very nice woman. Afterwards, I did not see her again. I only knew about his family from what he said. He said that his wife, I think, was a former athlete, and now teaches aerobics or fitness. His son studies at a very good school and gets great grades. He is completely assimilated.
        Q: Andrei, did you know about his friendship with Anna Politkovskaya?
        Lugovoi: No, I didn't. I should tell you that even the date of her
        Q: October 7.
        Lugovoi: I met him on Oct. 16, and we did not even discuss it. He didn't say a thing.
        Q: If, tomorrow, you think up some kind of theory or idea, where will you go: to the British Embassy or the F.S.B.?
        Lugovoi: You know, it depends on the idea.
        Q: About the cause of Litvinenko's death.
        Q: You will remember new information perhaps.
        Lugovoi: I will go, I'll say this. I will appeal to the law enforcement agencies of Britain and Russia. I will appeal to Britain because I was an acquaintance of Alexander and because the event look place on British territory and to Russia because I am a citizen of Russia and given the situation, I will absolutely be required to do it to rule out any speculation or variations.
        Q: We thank our guests. In our studio are Andrei Lugovoi, Dmitri Kovtun and Vyacheslav Sokolenko, people for whom there are many questions in relation to Alexander Litvinenko.
        TEXT
      