
        He built it. Now he is taking it apart.
        John J. Mack, in his boldest strategic move since he became chief executive last year, said yesterday that Morgan Stanley would spin off its slow-growing credit card unit, Discover.
        For Mr. Mack, a mastermind behind the 1997 merger with Dean Witter, Discover & Company that brought Discover into the Morgan Stanley fold, the decision is a tacit recognition that the firm's future success lies with its traditional heart, its lucrative trading and investment banking business.
        The results the firm released yesterday underscored that reality. Propelled by trading and banking, Morgan Stanley's operating earnings rose 26 percent in the fourth quarter, which ended Nov. 30. For the year, earnings rose 44 percent.
        Yet while the 2006 profit of just under $7.5 billion was a record for Morgan Stanley, it lagged the $9.5 billion generated by its archrival, Goldman Sachs, whose profit rose 76 percent for the year.
        The Morgan Stanley chief has clearly taken note of the extraordinary results being generated by Goldman Sachs, which spurned the financial supermarket model that Mr. Mack once embraced when he spearheaded the 1997 merger as president of the investment bank. A decade later, Goldman Sachs has replaced Citigroup as the financial archetype. The emphasis is now on concentrated specialties in trading and banking and not on diversification and synergies.
        To sharpen the firm's focus and recharge its faltering asset management business, Mr. Mack has invested nearly $1 billion in stakes in a variety of hedge funds. He has also signaled his intent to build an internal private equity unit, trying to replicate the successes of Goldman Sachs and others in that business. And Mr. Mack has allocated larger amounts of capital to his traders.
        ''The soul is back,'' said Anson M. Beard Jr., an advisory director at Morgan Stanley. Mr. Beard was part of a group of former executives who started a shareholder revolt that forced the departure last year of the previous chief executive, Philip J. Purcell. ''You have to give John credit for that.''
        Ties between Mr. Mack and the original group of eight Morgan Stanley dissidents have warmed noticeably in the last year. They had become strained when it became clear that top executives like Vikram S. Pandit and Joseph R. Perella would not return to the firm.
        A few months ago, Mr. Mack invited Mr. Beard; a former president, Robert G. Scott; and a former chairman, S. Parker Gilbert, among others, to lunch at the firm's headquarters, where he brought them up to date on his strategic thinking.
        The outside directors and many shareholders have long called for a spinoff, but Mr. Mack and his management team proceeded at their own pace in weighing the pros and cons of such a move. While they recognized that Discover had few synergies with the firm's securities businesses, the question was how best to make use of Discover's growing value as an asset. This topic became the thrust of a full-scale management review, headed by a co-president, Robert W. Scully, and Robert A. Kindler from the firm's investment banking division, that began in the last couple of months.
        When it became clear soon thereafter that a tax-free spinoff would be the most efficient approach, the board was briefed. It signed off on Mr. Mack's proposal on Monday. The spinoff is scheduled for the third quarter of 2007.
        Shares of Morgan Stanley rose $1.33, or 1.7 percent, yesterday to close at $81.70 -- their highest level since February 2001.
        ''We believe this will maximize value for Morgan Stanley and Discover shareholders,'' Mr. Mack said. ''We are confident that Discover will be a strong stand-alone company.''
        He said the division could tap the capital markets more successfully as an independent company.
        In 2005, Mr. Purcell proposed a spinoff of Discovery, only to have that move reversed by Mr. Mack when he took over. Since that time, market conditions for credit card companies have improved, along with Discover's performance. This year, the unit reported a record pretax profit of $1.6 billion, up 72 percent for the year, driven by a sharp improvement in its credit portfolio as delinquencies reached lows not seen in 10 years.
        Other credit card companies have taken advantage of the market conditions. Since its initial public stock offering this year, MasterCard's stock price has more than doubled.
        Analysts said Discover, as a separate company, could achieve a market value as high as $10 billion. And while the card's prestige does not rank as high as that of some others, its $50 billion portfolio and its improved performance may make it a takeover target for larger card-issuing banks like Bank of America, J. P. Morgan or Citigroup.
        Despite the firm's strong performance, Mr. Mack was careful yesterday to assert that Morgan Stanley had more work to do.
        ''For a number of quarters we have had record results, but there is still room for improvement in many of our businesses,'' he said.
        Those are the asset management and brokerage divisions, which are both in wide-ranging revamping programs under new management. In a conference call with analysts, Mr. Mack shot down the prospect of any similar disposal of these units, saying he was committed to keeping them.
        The brokerage unit showed marked improvement, with pre-tax profit up 104 percent from the quarter a year earlier. Under James P. Gorman, the former retail chief of Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley has fired underperforming brokers and replaced them with more productive financial advisers. Margins increased to 12 percent from 7 percent.
        Asset management, which has undergone even more substantial change, had a 50 percent decline in profit for the quarter as fund outflows continued to be a problem.
        The firm's institutional business carried the load, as usual. Its pretax profit increased 46 percent on the back of a robust showing from the mergers and acquisitions bankers, who have benefited from a strong deal-making environment. With interest rates low and liquidity high, the firm's bond traders also prospered, as did its prime brokerage unit, which serves the hedge fund industry.
        Surprisingly, given the quarter's bountiful trading conditions, the firm's principal trading revenue declined 20 percent from the third quarter.
        ''Trading should be up 20 percent, not down 20 percent,'' said Richard X. Bove, a securities analyst at Punk Ziegel & Company. ''I think Mack is moving in the right direction, but that trading number was horrible.''
      