
        The New York attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, has sued UBS, one of the world's largest private wealth managers, contending that it defrauded thousands of brokerage clients out of tens of millions of dollars by putting them into fee-based accounts unsuited for clients who trade infrequently.
        Mr. Spitzer's office accused UBS of encouraging brokers to shift customers away from traditional accounts, where clients pay on a per-trade basis, into InsightOne accounts, fee-based accounts in which charges are based on the assets being managed for the customer.
        The attorney general's complaint suggested that UBS promised clients that InsightOne accounts came with personalized advice, a promise that never materialized. ''UBS never intended to provide -- and in the end failed to provide -- InsightOne clients with a true advice-based account,'' the complaint says. It adds that the bank created incentives for brokers to move clients into the program and did not set guidelines to exclude unsuitable applicants.
        A statement issued by a spokesman, Mark Arena, said: ''UBS categorically denies that the program was part of a scheme to disadvantage clients, and intends to defend itself vigorously in this matter.''
        Fee-based accounts have flourished as a way to avoid churning, the process by which brokers encourage clients to trade often to generate higher commissions. UBS started InsightOne in 1999. After the technology bubble burst in 2000, and day trading screeched to a halt, fee-based accounts became more popular.
        In 2005, American investors had more than $268 billion in fee-based accounts. At UBS, InsightOne accounts made up about 3.5 percent of the firm's brokerage accounts in the United States, UBS said.
        Clients generally choose an account based on the amount of trading they do. For customers who are active in the market, fee-based accounts can make more sense. For those who do not trade a lot, fee-based accounts can lead to higher commission charges.
        According to Mr. Spitzer's complaint, UBS charged a 91-year-old woman more than $35,000 for two trades over two years -- $33,000 more than she would have paid in a commission-based account. According to the complaint, one broker wrote a supervisor in August 2004: ''[N]ow we have to trade heavy or light to stay within guidelines to keep InSight alive How wrong is that? You are not looking at the best interests of the client.''
        UBS said the program had operated in its clients' best interests. ''While InsightOne is not a discount program, since the program's inception in 1999 UBS clients have saved hundreds of millions of dollars, in aggregate, over what they would have paid in full commissions,'' the statement said.
        In November 2003, NASD warned its broker-dealer members not to move clients into fee-based accounts without ''reasonable grounds for believing that a fee-based program is appropriate for that particular customer'' and suggested that advisers take into account service provided, projected cost to the customer, alternative fee structures available and the customer's fee-structure preferences.
      