
        Statoil of Norway agreed on Monday to buy the oil and gas operations of a rival, Norsk Hydro, in an estimated $28 billion deal that would create the world's largest off-shore operator and a new national energy champion.
        Combining Statoil with the gas and oil operations of Norsk Hydro will create a Norwegian powerhouse that produces 1.9 million barrels a day and will be controlled by Norway's government.
        As well as dominating local production, Statoil will have operations in 40 countries from Iran and Russia to Angola and the Gulf of Mexico, and a fattened wallet to finance projects.
        Offshore oil and gas production will become increasingly important as new technology allows producers to extract natural resources from thousands of feet under the ocean, and reserves dwindle in easy-to-reach areas on land.
        At the same time, countries with sizable oil and gas reserves have been consolidating control of the assets, as rising oil prices make them more valuable. This energy nationalism may make it more difficult for oil companies to win fields or projects outside their own country, unless they can offer a clear technological edge.
        In October, Russia said it would develop its Shtokman gas field on its own, ending talks with Norsk Hydro, Statoil and other Western developers, though analysts are skeptical that Russia can get the offshore project running alone.
        The prime minister of Norway, Jens Stoltenberg, said Monday that the country was ''creating a global energy company.''
        Norway holds about half of Europe's remaining oil and gas reserves, and is the world's third-largest oil exporter after Saudi Arabia and Russia.
        The expanded Statoil's estimated 6.3 billion barrels in oil and gas reserves will be a fraction of Saudi Arabia's national oil company, or Russia's gas company Gazprom, but the company's exports are important to Western Europe.
        The company will be a ''major and reliable supplier of gas into Europe,'' said the president and chief executive of Norsk Hydro, Eivind Reiten, who will be chairman of the new company. Some European countries became concerned last winter when Gazprom suspended gas supplies to the Ukraine after a price dispute.
        Norsk Hydro's shareholders will have 32.7 percent of the new company, and Statoil's the remainder. Norsk Hydro shareholders will receive 0.8622 share in the new company for each share they own, and continue to own shares in Norsk Hydro's core aluminum business, which will remain independent. The expanded Statoil will have a market capitalization of about 575 billion Norwegian kroner (about $92 billion).
        The Norwegian government, which owns large stakes of both companies, will own 62 percent of the newly enlarged Statoil, and is expected to increase that stake to 67 percent after the closing of the deal, which is scheduled for the third quarter of 2007.
        Because of its oil and gas supplies, Norway has amassed a giant Government Pension Fund, which owns about $250 billion in assets around the world.
        Merrill Lynch analysts estimate that the offer represents a 20 percent premium for Norsk Hydro shareholders, based on Friday's closing price and a value of 37 kroner a share for Norsk Hydro's aluminum business. ''There is compelling strategic logic for this move,'' they said.
        Even though Norway is not part of the European Union, moves in Brussels may have pushed the Norwegian companies to combine oil and gas assets. European energy companies are in the midst of consolidation, ahead of the European Union's liberalization of energy assets next year.
        Executives from both sides were loath to talk about cost cuts on Monday, saying the deal was about growth. Statoil's employees will increase by about 5,000, to 31,000.
        Statoil will also be renamed, but a new name has not yet been decided. The new company's board will be comprise three members from Norsk Hydro, four from Statoil and three employee representatives.
        Changes in Norway's energy landscape could have far-reaching repercussions for some countries. Britain is becoming more dependent on Norway as its own North Sea reserves dwindle, and the Ormen Lange field of Norway could supply up to 20 percent of Britain's energy demands, after it starts pumping in 2007.
        Norway is also expected to start shipping liquefied natural gas to the United States next year.
      