
        OUR boys have had three bikes stolen in the last few years, two from our yard. We reported the first two to the police, went driving around town looking, but never found them. While it's not the end of the world, you feel violated and powerless as a parent.
        ''Why wasn't the bike locked?'' I yelled.
        ''It was in the yard, Dad.''
        By the third, we didn't bother making a report, but we did get lucky. A few days later, my oldest son saw a kid riding it, chased him down and took the bike back. I got the boy's name and was planning to track down his parents, but never did. I regret this, even more so after hearing what happened to the Fishmans, a family we know in our community.
        Their older son Zack, then a high school junior, rode home from school in the spring of 2005, left his bike in the front yard, picked up his gloves for weight training and came out minutes later to find the bike gone. He said he had an immediate suspicion who took it. A small group of high school boys was walking behind him, and he knew one. ''No one else was on the block,'' he said. ''I knew this kid from middle school.''
        Zack and his mother, Judy, drove around Lido as well as neighboring Long Beach and Point Lookout, but had no luck. Ms. Fishman reported it to the police -- a $300 Electra cruiser that had been Zack's birthday present months before.
        From talking to police and school officials, the Fishmans got the address where the boy lived and learned this wasn't the first bike he was suspected of stealing. That night, when Perry Fishman, Zack's father, got home from work, he wanted to go to the boy's house, but his wife and son asked him not to.
        ''We were 99 percent sure,'' said Mr. Fishman, ''But they said, 'What if it's not him?' ''
        Zack checked the bike racks at school; a few days later he was sure he spotted the bike. The original silver color was now black; the brand name was covered with stickers; the chain guard was gone. But the curve of the handlebars and shape of the frame were unmistakable, he said. The boy who had the bike now was not the one they suspected, but he told Zack he had ''borrowed'' it from the suspected kid. By then, Zack had learned about serial numbers. ''I made the kid turn it over and wrote down the number,'' said Zack, who later checked the bike shop receipt. It was Zack's bike.
        Zack's mother began making regular drives past the suspect's house. ''Four times a day,'' Ms. Fishman said. ''I was stalking them. The police said there was nothing they could do unless they saw the bike in the kid's possession.''
        A few weeks passed. No bike. Zack had relied on it to get to school and around town. The Fishmans bought him a new one.
        Still, Mr. Fishman could not let it go. He felt used; he felt that giving up sent a bad message to his two sons; and he felt the kid who'd taken Zack's bike had parents who should be held responsible.
        One evening after work, Mr. Fishman rang the suspect's doorbell, and a woman answered. ''It was a house like ours,'' he said. ''She was an attractive middle-aged woman, nicely dressed like she just came from work.
        ''I said to her, 'I'm sorry I'm here, but I think your son stole my son's bike from in front of my house.' She says, 'It couldn't be my son.' I said, 'O.K., we're in touch with the police and they know your son's name.' I said, 'I brought a bill, if you pay me, I'll tell the cops this was a misunderstanding.' She said, 'My son wouldn't do that.'
        ''I said, 'It must be very difficult living in a house with someone you can't trust.' I got a little louder. I said, 'I'm very uncomfortable doing this,' but I couldn't let it go.
        ''Suddenly a kid starts screaming out a window, 'Leave my mother alone!' and she starts yelling at him, 'Go back in the house, shut the window!' It must have been so embarrassing for her.'' Mr. Fishman made it clear he was disappointed in the mother, got in his car and drove home. ''I was shaking,'' he said.
        Soon after, Rick Fusillo, the owner of Long Beach Bicycle, where the Fishmans buy their bikes, spotted the stolen bike and called them and the police. A different boy had it this time, but he also said he'd ''borrowed'' it from the kid the Fishmans suspected. This boy surrendered the bike, which by then was beat up, and Zack rode it home.
        About that time, the boy left school, and Zack heard he had changed schools.
        Then one night last summer, more than a year later, there was a knock at the Fishmans' door at 9 o'clock. ''It was a teenager with an older gentleman,'' Mr. Fishman said. ''I had no clue who they were. The kid says his name and, 'I stole your son's bike last year.' '' It was the boy they had suspected all along. ''I just about hit the floor,'' Mr. Fishman said. ''I said, 'Come in.' He said: 'I was showing off for my friends. I was trying to be the big man. I want to apologize.' ''
        Mr. Fishman told him to wait, and called Zack downstairs.
        ''He told us he was a liar and a thief when he stole the bike,'' Ms. Fishman recalled. ''He handed us an envelope. Zack said, 'It's the past, it's cool.' We shook hands and they left.'' The visit lasted just a few minutes. Inside the envelope were 15 $20 bills.
        ''We just looked at each other,'' Ms. Fishman said. ''We were in shock. There was so much unsaid. We weren't clear if the older man was the father or family friend or counselor. The way the boy spoke sounded like someone who might have been in a program.''
        ''He seemed sincere,'' said Mr. Fishman.
        ''I saw a little moisture in his eyes,'' said Zack. ''I don't think it was from anything else, we weren't grilling or anything.''
        They all wondered what brought about the change.
        I did, too. So last Sunday I visited the same house Mr. Fishman had 18 months before and rang the bell. From behind the door, a woman asked what I wanted. I explained who I was and why I wanted to talk. I promised not to use her son's name. I said it seemed like a story of redemption.
        An attractive middle-aged woman opened the door. She nodded as I explained. ''I'll think about it,'' she said, smiling. She took my card and I left.
        She called Tuesday and said she wasn't ready to speak yet, although she might be soon. So I can't prove this, but here's what I think. When Mr. Fishman knocked on the thief's door, he did it for himself and his family. But it appears he may have helped a second family as well.
        PARENTING E-mail: parenting@nytimes.com
      