
        When composers shed their attachment to tonality, near the turn of the 20th century, pictorialism was probably the last thing on their minds. But the use of free dissonance, and the abandonment of the notion that key relationships are governed by strict rules, gave them the power to create vivid depictions of everything from the concrete (scenes and actions) to the ethereal (states of mind). To the extent that such painterly composition was possible before, it was stylized: Vivaldi's ''Seasons'' unfold with tightly prescribed harmonic relationships, and even avant-garde moments like the chaotic opening of Haydn's ''Creation'' resolve into comfortable tonality.
        In his concert with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon, and in a multimedia exploration of Bartok's ''Miraculous Mandarin,'' on Saturday evening, Pierre Boulez demonstrated how the limits of musical expression have been decimated in the last century. Along the way he showed that the Chicago Symphony, section for section, is in magnificent shape. But that was almost a given, and it seemed beside the point.
        Mr. Boulez began the Sunday concert with Ravel's ''Valses Nobles et Sentimentales,'' a work written partly as a tribute to Schubert, but molded in a different universe. Schubert's dances are just that: comparatively light pieces that evoke the rhythms of the ballroom. What Ravel delivers is a three-dimensional image of the ballroom itself, complete with the dizzying swirl of the dancers, and the undercurrents of mystery and pure sensuality that connect them.
        The notion that all this could be captured in music is entirely modern. So is the idea that music need not depict lofty ideals, but can as easily convey violence and degradation, and, stranger still, the power of love as a redemptive force within such a realistically shabby context. That was what Bartok conveyed in ''The Miraculous Mandarin,'' a pantomime in which three low-life villains put a girl, Mimi, in an apartment window as a lure for victims they hope to rob. Her first two visitors are penniless and thrown out. The third, the Mandarin, is so smitten with Mimi that attempts to kill him fail; he dies only after Mimi stops resisting his embraces.
        Bartok's score is violence incarnate, and in both the Saturday and Sunday concerts Mr. Boulez and his players -- the deliberately blaring brasses and athletic percussionists, most notably, aided by full-bodied woodwind and string playing -- gave it the visceral wallop that Bartok intended. But they also evoked the music's fleetingly tender side, in the gracefully winding clarinet lines that represent Mimi. The Sunday afternoon performance had a slightly harder, more conclusive edge than Saturday evening's.
        The attraction of the Saturday concert was the 50-minute program, written and narrated by Gerard McBurney, with readings by Daniel Allar. An installment of a series directed by Mr. McBurney, now in its second season in Chicago, the program used photographs, film, recordings (of folk songs Bartok collected) and live excerpts played by the orchestra, to put Bartok's score in a historical and social context.
        Freud's observations about mankind's savagery, diary entries by Frank Wedekind and lyrics by Brecht clarified the degree to which ''Miraculous Mandarin'' is of its time. And for listeners not versed in European history, Mr. McBurney offered a capsule portrait of the years following World War I, when Bartok composed this brutal, pointed theater work. (The program will be available as a free video download from the orchestra's Web site, www.cso.org, in late January.)
        Not quite lost between the Ravel and the Bartok on Sunday was Gyorgy Ligeti's Piano Concerto, a work completed in 1988, when tonality was less an issue than breaking boundaries between formal and vernacular styles. Its opening movement is rooted in jazz, and Pierre-Laurent Aimard played the sharply rhythmic piano line propulsively and powerfully. But the work doesn't require those qualities for long, and Mr. Aimard tempered them -- moving at times toward outright delicacy -- as the score morphed through sections dominated by African-inspired percussion, dreamlike chromaticism and, in its finale, a welter of quickly shifting timbres. Who, a decade ago, could have imagined a pianist getting five curtain calls after playing a Ligeti score?
        MUSIC REVIEW
      