
        A horrendous brawl enveloped the Madison Square Garden court, an investigation came and went, and after all of the suspensions and fines were levied, Isiah Thomas stood literally and figuratively in the exact same position: in front of the Knicks' bench, unaffected, unbowed and unrepentant.
        Seven players -- four of them Thomas's -- were suspended yesterday for their involvement in Saturday night's sprawling melee between the Knicks and Denver Nuggets. The incident began with a flagrant foul, one that seemed to be foreshadowed by Thomas in a caught-on-tape conversation with the Nuggets star Carmelo Anthony.
        But Thomas escaped punishment because of the absence of ''adequate evidence,'' in the words of N.B.A. Commissioner David Stern. The league did not allege wrongdoing by Thomas, but neither did Stern exonerate him.
        So Thomas was back on the Garden sideline for last night's game against the Utah Jazz. Just as he has survived a poor record and frequent calls for his dismissal, Thomas had survived the broad fallout from the worst N.B.A. brawl in two years.
        Although he was the focus of news media coverage, and of the league's investigation, for nearly two days, Thomas -- apparently under orders from his employer -- declined to comment on the fight, the suspensions or his own role in the incident.
        ''I understand all of you have a job, and some of you are probably here because of what happened,'' Thomas told a packed room of reporters before the game. ''But our focus here tonight is to try to beat the Jazz and try to move on from here.''
        The National Basketball Association fined the Knicks and the Nuggets $500,000 apiece, an unprecedented measure that Stern described as an attempt to hold teams accountable for their employees' actions. Among the Knicks, Nate Robinson received the longest suspension -- 10 games -- for prolonging and exacerbating the fight. Mardy Collins was suspended six games for committing the violent foul that set off the melee. Jared Jeffries was suspended four games for chasing Carmelo Anthony down the court after Anthony punched Collins. And Jerome James was suspended one game for leaving the bench area during the brawl.
        That Thomas escaped punishment came as somewhat of a surprise, particularly to the Nuggets, who blamed him for inciting the brawl.
        Denver officials pointed to game tape that showed Thomas speaking to Anthony with 1 minute 32 seconds left Saturday. Thomas is seen saying: ''Hey, don't go to the basket right now. It wouldn't be a good idea. I'm just letting you know.''
        It sounded like a warning. Seventeen seconds later, Collins hammered Denver's J. R. Smith from behind as Smith raced toward the basket on a fast break. Chaos ensued, with Smith and Robinson trading blows and falling into the first row of baseline seats. Moments later, Anthony landed a roundhouse punch to Collins's left cheek, for which he was suspended for 15 games.
        Denver Coach George Karl angrily blamed Thomas for the brawl.
        ''In my mind, it was premeditated, it was directed by Isiah,'' Karl, referring to Collins's foul, told Denver reporters. ''I think his actions after the game was despicable. He made a bad situation worse.''
        Although the Nuggets saw a direct cause and effect, from Thomas's comments to Collins's flagrant foul, Stern stopped far short of that conclusion.
        ''My finding was that there was not adequate evidence upon which to make a determination,'' Stern said in a conference call. ''You have to find something in order to suspend someone. Even in the N.B.A. there's a presumption of innocence.''
        The league interviewed all participants from both teams ''and watched the tape closely,'' Stern said.
        ''We're acting on definitive information in issuing these penalties, although we're not unmindful of the issues swirling about,'' he said.
        Earlier in the day, Thomas argued that his words to Anthony had been misconstrued. Thomas said he was upset that the Nuggets -- who were leading by 117-100 at the time -- still had four starters in the game.
        ''I didn't warn him,'' Thomas said of Anthony, the league's leading scorer. ''I just said to those guys that this isn't the way that you should act, this isn't the way that you should be. You shouldn't be rubbing it in. But it wasn't a threat, it was more or less, 'This isn't how you do it.' ''
        Asked why he told Anthony not to go to the basket, Thomas said, ''It wasn't necessarily not go to the basket but, basically, don't rub it in. It wouldn't be a good idea for you to rub it in or go to the basket and dunk it on our guys. We're down 18, we're down 19, you don't need to act like that. Basically, show some class.''
        Thomas is working under a one-year ultimatum from Knicks' ownership and has shown signs of the strain. He was ejected from a game for arguing with the referees. He has criticized Knicks fans for booing and opponents for having fun at his team's expense. During a game in San Antonio last month, Thomas screamed at the Spurs' Bruce Bowen and had to be restrained from going after Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich.
        All of this has made Thomas, the subject of ''Fire Thomas'' chants at the Garden, even more of a target. Asked if he had evaluated his own behavior, and any need to adjust, Thomas said simply, ''No.''
        Last week, the Garden chairman, James L. Dolan, reaffirmed that Thomas would have the entire season to try to save his jobs as coach and president. It is believed that Saturday's events did not change Dolan's position.
        Before Monday's game, Thomas met at length with Dolan in a room across from the Knicks' locker room. Thomas declined to provide details of their conversation.
        Dolan issued a statement that stood as the organization's only public reaction once the suspensions were announced.
        ''I was sitting just a few feet away at the end of Saturday night's game,'' he said. ''I believe the commissioner acted appropriately, as it was an ugly incident, not worthy of the Knicks, Nuggets, Madison Square Garden or the people of New York. I am grateful to the fans and our security personnel for remaining calm during some very chaotic moments. The incident was deeply regrettable, unacceptable on every level and I hope and expect to never witness anything like it again. We are all very sorry it happened. We will have no further comment on this matter.''
        At the team's morning shoot-around, before the suspensions were announced, Collins, Robinson and Jeffries expressed remorse.
        ''I'm very sad,'' Robinson said, his tone having changed markedly from Saturday night. ''I don't want to send the wrong message to kids, saying it's cool to fight, it's cool to go out there and do those type of things.''
        Collins, a rookie guard, said that Thomas did not order anyone to commit a hard foul. ''The only thing Coach said was play hard for 48 minutes,'' he said.
        Regarding the play that set off the mayhem, Collins said: ''It was a hard foul. I didn't mean to hurt the guy.'' He later explained, ''We were down 20, I just didn't want the guy to do a dunk.'' Collins said he had ''no regret fouling him as hard as I did.''
        ''I just regret that the whole thing escalated the way it did,'' he said.
        PRO BASKETBALL
      