
        ''IT looked better then, didn't it?'' the Broadway playwright Steven Sater is saying, somewhat wistfully, studying photos of his idiosyncratic Dakota apartment in a design book, back in its glory days as a minimalist showcase. An explanation, offered up frequently: ''It was really handsome when we moved in. There were, like, little blinds in the bathroom. Then we had kids and it got destroyed.''
        Oh, sure, blame the kids, who don't even live here full time anymore.
        Was it the kids who left open volumes of King Lear and Frankenstein and Proust in this tiny two-room apartment with a sleeping loft under the eaves? Was it the kids who left their jeans on the twin beds in the dining room-kitchen and piles of audio cassettes and scripts on the kitchen table? Come to think of it, Mr. Sater, why are those jeans on the bed?
        The playwright, a bundle of exceedingly sensitive nerves in a pale, slight body of which a consumptive poet would be proud, opens a small, oddly shaped door, hidden in a corner of the room.
        ''Because my wife's stuff is in the closet,'' he says.
        What's your preference? The cool, spare lines of the photo-ready apartment that the celebrated minimalist designer Joe D'Urso called ''one of the most inventive things I've ever done,'' which featured a 16-foot-long leather banquette in the living room and a clean, white-walled sleeping loft free of such visual detritus as a place to store your underwear? Or the clutter of the home of a preoccupied artist getting ready for his opening night, who somehow managed to raise a family here, with a gold-plated Buddhist altar dominating most of the living space? (The offerings of corn chips and pasta on the altar, which the family will eventually eat, were chosen because of their long shelf life -- this is a bicoastal family.)
        The Broadway show, for which Mr. Sater wrote the lyrics and adaptation and the singer-songwriter Duncan Sheik did the music, is ''Spring Awakening,'' a story of teenage angst, set to a rock beat. Taken from an 1891 drama by the German playwright Frank Wedekind, the show deals with masturbation, sex, homosexuality, abortion and suicide. When it opened this week, this paper's review called the show ''a straight shot of eroticism'' and the score ''ravishing.''
        It is Mr. Sater's first Broadway show. And while one might have assumed, a few days before the opening, that Broadway concerns were why Mr. Sater's apartment and his small office down the hall were in such writerly disarray, the evidence suggests that when it comes to worldly matters, Mr. Sater has always been distracted. Mr. Sater has never, however, been indifferent to the aesthetics of the Dakota. He saw it first as a Princeton graduate student visiting New York, and it was love:
        ''It was where I belonged,'' Mr. Sater says. ''I would say I was haunted by it.''
        He adds, ''I'm not someone who had seen 'Rosemary's Baby.' I looked at it and felt it right away. The mystique, the architecture.''
        But loving the apartment as he does --
        -- ''Why not put more love and care in the apartment?'' Mr. Sater says, anticipating the question. ''You know what? I stay in a cloud most of the time. I'm just working. I don't notice things.''
        And though Mr. Sater pays little attention to furnishings, he has never been indifferent to this 9th-story courtyard apartment, on a floor of mostly maids' rooms, where Boris Karloff and Judy Garland once lived and Leonard Bernstein had his studio. Mr. Sater found it in the late 80s, when he was single, by hounding real estate agents a few times a week. Though he was still a struggling writer, he used all the money his great-grandmother had left him to buy it. The apartment is not large: The dining room-kitchen area is 10 by 24 feet. The apartment does, however, have great charm: in the sleeping loft above the living room one can see the bones of the building's gabled roof or look out over the rooftops to Central Park. How much it cost, Mr. Sater cannot recall exactly -- he estimates about $375,000.
        So to that even more mysterious matter, the making of an artist.
        Mr. Sater grew up in Evansville, Ind., where his father owned a line of clothing stores. He was a sickly boy who was reading Emily Dickinson and Walt Whitman at 11, who did not feel he belonged until he took part in a high school play. But it was not until the end of his sophomore year at Washington University in St. Louis that he had the experience that altered his life: While living in an old building off-campus, he woke up to find his third-story apartment on fire.
        ''I was trapped out on the balcony,'' Mr. Sater says. ''People across the street were yelling, 'We've called the fire department.' But the fire was coming closer and closer. It finally blew out the glass of the French doors and caught me and I was on fire. I was in my bathrobe. I was in flames. I put out the fire on my face'' -- he slaps the side of his face -- ''someone screamed 'Jump!' I think if they hadn't, I would have died.''
        Mr. Sater shattered several vertebrae in his back, broke his arms and wrist, and suffered second-degree burns. He spent four months in a hospital. ''I was laid up in a Striker Frame. It's like an ironing board; John F. Kennedy was in one. They turned me every two hours and when I was on my stomach, I had a page-turner I could turn with my teeth.'' The effect of leaping out of a burning building on one's creative life?
        ''I felt I wanted to create things that could last. Really what I felt was I wanted to create works of literature that could become part of the world.''
        He studied English literature and the classics at Princeton, then moved to New York, working for a literary agent to pay the bills and writing plays. He became involved in the somewhat controversial Soka Gakkai group, which advocates repeatedly chanting the phrase ''nam-myoho-renge-kyo'' to achieve one's goals. Mr. Sater met both his collaborator, Mr. Sheik, and his wife, Lori, a ceramicist and jewelry designer, through the group. They bought the gold-plated altar, at which they chant twice daily, on their honeymoon in Japan.
        When the children, David and Emily, who are now 14 and 11, came along, they slept in the eat-in kitchen. Occasionally, Mr. Sater and his wife considered selling the apartment and buying a larger place, but Mr. Sater never could bring himself to sell.
        ''I have no friend who didn't say, in some way, this is going to be the death of your marriage,'' he says.
        Meanwhile, Mr. Sater's career began to take off. Two years ago, with theater and television work taking him frequently to the West Coast, he moved the family's base to Los Angeles.
        Mr. Sater excuses himself to use the bathroom in his office in another tiny apartment on the same floor -- in the family apartment, he explains, going to the bathroom is kind of a public event. Why that is becomes apparent when the reporter uses the bathroom: the diagonally cut, stainless-steel door, its surface unbroken by a doorknob, cannot be entirely closed.
        ''You're lucky you married the woman you did,'' Mr. Sater is told when he returns.
        He concurs.
        ''It was a real struggle living here,'' he says. ''It was very hard on my marriage and hard on the kids. I remember a mortifying moment, the first time Emily had a friend over. She said, 'Wait till you see the other room.' ''
        He talks about the two-story house they are renting in Los Angeles: the three large bedrooms, the closets. And after 15 years of marriage, they finally have a full-size refrigerator. But he also adds that he now considers himself bicoastal.
        He's never going to sell, is he?
        ''No,'' Mr. Sater says.
        What is it he sees when he looks down on the courtyard?
        He kneels on a little love seat in front of a courtyard window and tries to explain it.
        ''I don't know,'' he says. ''Another world, a world that feels like a place I could have imagined.''
        ''I loved Grimm's fairy tales,'' he adds, and here ''you feel like you're living in a medieval castle. You feel like you're in another world -- transported into a world where your imagination just feels free.''
        AT HOME WITH STEVEN SATER
      