
        Only a few weeks after leaving his job on Wall Street in the spring of 2004, Lawrence Schloss found himself dealing with dirty running water and eight-hour walks across glaciers that at times threatened to collapse.
        For three weeks, Mr. Schloss, formerly the global head of Credit Suisse's private equity business, was simply Larry from New York, traversing paths along Mount Everest with a group of nine other tourists and their guides.
        ''It was incredibly calming,'' Mr. Schloss, 52, said in an interview this week at his office, as he pointed out in photos and on maps exactly where he and his group had been.
        When he returned, members of his former team at Credit Suisse called him and asked what he was up to. By the fall, they had set up their own fledgling buyout shop, Diamond Castle Holdings, to focus on leveraged buyouts and recapitalizations in the media, health care, financial services, power and industrial sectors.
        Yesterday, Diamond Castle announced that it had closed on raising $1.825 billion for its first fund, Diamond Castle Partners IV. The firm has already committed $675 million, or about 40 percent, of the fund to buying six companies.
        The Diamond Castle fund is dwarfed by the $32 billion that Mr. Schloss oversaw in his old job heading CSFB Private Equity, one of the premier buyout operations at the time. But he is confident that he and his team can compete with the behemoths.
        The confidence extends even to the name of their fund. While it is their first fund, he and his partners -- Ari J. Benacerraf, Michael W. Ranger, Andrew H. Rush and David M. Wittels -- began at IV because, given their combined experience, they felt that they should not have to start at I.
        Their confidence seems to be shared by the firm's investors, many of them clients from their Credit Suisse days. Mr. Schloss said having 40 percent of Diamond Castle Partners IV already invested by the closing date was highly unusual for a first fund. About 75 percent of the fund's investors had previously invested with the Diamond Castle team, first at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette and later at Credit Suisse.
        ''Larry's incredibly bright, incredibly honest and he knows how to make money,'' said Mark D. Wiseman, senior vice president for private investments at the Canada Pension Plan's investment board, which is an investor in the Diamond Castle fund. ''He's kind of like the Jack Welch of private equity,'' referring to the former chief executive of General Electric.
        This has been an extraordinary year for buyout firms. Private equity deal volume has grown to $375.6 billion in 1,130 transactions, accounting for a record 26.8 percent of all transactions in the United States, according to Thomson Financial. Seven of the 10 largest buyouts on record were announced this year.
        And the big investment banks have embraced the trend. Merrill Lynch was a principal in the buyout of the hospital chain HCA for about $33 billion, and Goldman Sachs's private equity unit has invested in scores of buyouts this year.
        Mr. Schloss has been in the game for a long time. He first arrived at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette in 1978 as an investment banker, and he soon made a name for himself by helping found the investment bank's private equity shop. By the time he left Credit Suisse, which had acquired Donaldson, Lufkin in 2000, he had overseen transactions of more than $100 billion.
        He attributed his success to a genuine interest in the private equity business, a quality noticeable in a 15-minute discourse on connecting the dots and figuring out the angles in a theoretical acquisition of a maker of paper napkins. The process of identifying companies, negotiating the terms to buy them and helping their management improve the business never gets old, he said.
        ''There's always something to think about,'' Mr. Schloss said. ''It's a gas.''
        Moreover, it is clear that Mr. Schloss believes in the superiority of private equity over public ownership.
        Blaming what he calls ''the myopia of quarterly earnings,'' he is troubled by the sometimes volatile nature of the stock market, where missing analyst earnings expectations by a penny can crater a company's stock in hours.
        But now it appears that too many others agree and have leaped into private equity, and Mr. Schloss said he was under no illusions about the hurdles his team faces in building Diamond Castle: getting known, obtaining additional capital. But he has learned to stick to his strengths and avoid his weaknesses. No one will see Diamond Castle investing in a restaurant chain, for example.
        And although the transition from the summit of private equity to starting from the bottom was rocky early on -- his team had to deal with new business issues like finding furniture and deciding on a name for their company -- Mr. Schloss said he enjoyed the challenge of helping build a firm from the ground up.
        It will take time to hire more team members and to attract more investors to Diamond Castle, but the smaller focus of the deals presents an opportunity to fly below the radar and to spend more time with companies he feels can grow and succeed, he said.
        ''I had been to the summit, and I wanted to try something different,'' he said.
        While the private equity business will eventually slow, no crash seems imminent, Mr. Schloss said, pointing to a strong economy, vast amounts of liquidity and relatively low, stable interest rates.
        ''Make no mistake, this is a golden time for private equity,'' he said.
      