
        STARTING next Sunday, for the first time in nearly 20 years, one-stop shopping for working cowboys will no longer be available in the Village. That is the date Whiskey Dust will pack up the ranch, like a boomtown entrepreneur that has become a victim of its own success.
        Whiskey Dust, a Western clothing and curio shop, has been celebrated for nearly two decades as the only store in the city that carries every item, save the horse, that a real cowboy needs, from spurs and chaps to branding irons and saddles.
        In the early 1990s, Whiskey Dust was the anchor of a trio of authentic Western establishments that turned Hudson Street between West 10th and Charles Streets into a miniature cow town. In a neighborhood whose residents would have been quick to reject a T. G. I. Friday's-style, ready-made down-home atmosphere, Whiskey Dust used its authenticity as a calling card for prop stylists, photographers and clothing designers, not to mention the occasional dominatrix in search of a good bullwhip.
        Bruce Springsteen bought cowboy boots there, according to the proprietor, Hollie Bendewald, and it was there that Calvin Klein sought a Halloween costume that he hoped would make the Western wear connoisseur Ralph Lauren jealous.
        At times Whiskey Dust's merchandise has been a touch too authentic for urban cowboys and girls looking to keep up with the periodic Western fashion revival, Ms. Bendewald said the other day as she sorted through vintage cowboy hats. ''Here's a juicy one,'' she said as she produced a hat with dense inner ring of real cowboy sweat, its brim splattered with authentic bull's blood.
        Her husband, a Montana rancher named Mervin, had arrived in the far West Village in the '60s, when the neighborhood was not yet gentrified, and started a string of Western-theme businesses, culminating with Whiskey Dust in 1988. Ms. Bendewald met him when Whiskey Dust was in its infancy. ''It was just a hoot of a store,'' she recalled, ''with stuffed rattlesnakes, some of Merv's early taxidermy efforts, and deerskin vests with bullet holes in them.''
        The Bendewalds spent their summers traveling the West and Southwest, acquiring the artifacts that now bulge from the tiny subterranean shop and the rest of the town house above it. Among the most memorable items are a fireplace mantle from a bordello, sombreros from the 1920s and Antoine, a stuffed cow's head that appears as a prop on ''Late Night With Conan O'Brien.''
        Around the time that Whiskey Dust was staking its claim, Bob Phillips, a Roy Rogers biographer from Texas, opened Dusty Trails, a shop specializing in Western records, sheet music and other ephemera. Another Texan, Sherry Delamarter, opened the restaurant Cowgirl Hall of Fame.
        With Dusty Trails gone since the mid-'90s and Whiskey Dust on the way out, the Cowgirl Hall of Fame will be the block's only refuge for anyone looking for a discourse on the different styles of barbed wire used in cattle ranching.
        ''It was ironic that we all ended up on the same block,'' Ms. Delamarter said. ''Opening a Western-themed business was a very fragile concept in New York, where there is very little dialogue with the middle of the country.''
        In its lifetime, Whiskey Dust has outfitted Owen Wilson's foppish novelist Eli Cash in the movie ''The Royal Tenenbaums,'' as well as the Broadway cast of ''Annie Get Your Gun.''
        ''And thank God for Sam Shepard's plays,'' Ms. Bendewald said. ''There are always guys coming in wanting to learn how to use a lasso, because there is one where a guy has to rope a bedpost, so Merv used to take them into the backyard and teach them.''
        But with the death of Mr. Bendewald in 2001, crisscrossing the country in search of estate sales and unexplored barns just wasn't as much fun. ''It really was Merv's passion,'' his wife said, and as the West Village has become home to ever-increasing herds of baby carriages, and prime real estate has become as valuable as an oil well, it makes more economic sense to rent the property.
        As she was working this day, Merle Haggard was singing his classic Urban Cowboy's lament ''Big City'' on the store's radio. ''Turn me loose, set me free,'' he crooned, ''somewhere in the middle of Montana.''
        Street Level | Greenwich Village E-mail: streetlevel@nytimes.com
      