
        Street battles between rival Palestinian factions, including a shootout on the grounds of Gaza City's main hospital, continued Tuesday, leaving at least five people dead and nearly 20 wounded.
        After another chaotic day in the Gaza Strip, security chiefs from the feuding groups, Hamas and Fatah, said Tuesday night that they had reached a new agreement to remove gunmen from the streets. But it is not clear whether that deal will be more successful than a cease-fire announced Sunday night.
        On the diplomatic front, Israel's prime minister, Ehud Olmert, made a surprise trip to Jordan for talks with King Abdullah II on the prospects for reviving peace talks with the Palestinians. Mr. Olmert traveled by helicopter and took only a few aides for the two-hour meeting, Israeli officials said.
        In a statement released afterward, the king urged Mr. Olmert to ''engage in negotiations with the Palestinians so that an appropriate framework could be found to relaunch the peace process.'' Israel and the Palestinians have not held full-fledged peace talks in almost six years, and none are on the horizon.
        The statement also said Abdullah was willing to mediate between Hamas and Fatah. Tensions between the groups are high as the Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas, has called for new elections to break the political gridlock between them -- a plan that Hamas, which controls the legislature, rejects.
        The Sunday night cease-fire did nothing to halt the bloodletting in Gaza, which has included some of the worst internal fighting since the Palestinian Authority was established in 1994.
        But in a renewed effort, Egyptian diplomats on Tuesday brought together the Palestinian interior minister, Said Siam of Hamas, and the heads of the Palestinian security forces in Gaza City, most of whom are from Fatah.
        The Palestinians agreed that the factions would remove their gunmen from the streets and that the multiple security force branches would establish a joint operating center.
        Earlier in the day, Mr. Abbas, in a statement issued from his office in the West Bank city of Ramallah, said, ''I call on everyone without exception to cease fire.''
        But gunmen from both factions, many of them masked, roamed the streets of Gaza City in large numbers during the day. When shooting broke out, civilians, including small children heading home from school, scrambled for cover.
        At the end of the day, all schools in Gaza were ordered closed until further notice. While most of the fighting involved automatic gunfire, the combatants also fired mortars and rocket-propelled grenades.
        The Palestinian prime minister, Ismail Haniya, who is from Hamas, appealed for calm and Palestinian unity in a televised speech.
        Mr. Haniya again rejected Mr. Abbas's call for new Palestinian elections, saying that Mr. Abbas did not have the authority to call a new ballot. But with Western countries having cut off aid, the Hamas-led government is broke and has been unable to pay salaries or govern in any meaningful way.
        In Tuesday's battles, shooting broke out on the grounds of Gaza City's main hospital, Shifa, when Fatah militants were taking one of their wounded fighters there early in the morning. The gunfire lasted more than an hour, and one Hamas policeman was killed, with several Hamas members wounded.
        Later, a group of Fatah militants came under fire while traveling on one of Gaza City's main roads. Two militants were killed and nine bystanders were wounded, including five children, according to medical workers.
        Also, Fatah said two of its members had been kidnapped and shot, and their bodies dumped in the street.
        In the West Bank, Israeli troops killed two Palestinian militants in separate shootings, one in Nablus and the other near Tulkarm, Israeli security officials said.
        In addition, Israeli troops fatally shot a 14-year-old Palestinian girl, Daah al-Kader, when she approached Israel's West Bank separation barrier near Tulkarm, the Israeli military and Palestinians said. The military began an investigation of the shooting and suspended the platoon commander and one of the soldiers in the platoon, the military added.
      