
        LONG ISLAND SOUND is often viewed as a panacea for all that ails Connecticut's desperately congested roads and rails to and from New York.
        Despite two recent studies suggesting that ferry service holds the potential for success, there is skepticism that the first commuter ferries between Connecticut and Manhattan will soon, if ever, join the dozens already running into New York from elsewhere in the region.
        ''I'm pessimistic,'' said Mayor Dannel P. Malloy of Stamford, the city considered by both studies to be the linchpin for New York-bound ferry service. Mr. Malloy said he had been approached some 20 times during his 11 years in office by people interested in starting ferry service -- all with no result. ''There's probably a reason that there exists no ferry service between Connecticut and New York City,'' he said.
        Actually, there are many reasons. For instance, Metro-North, with its extensive schedule, runs far more trains every day than a ferry operator would be able to offer, and any operator would have to balance the need to keep fuel costs down with the need to make the trip by ferry fast enough to compete with trains.
        But perhaps the most vexing issue is whether private ferry service should be subsidized.
        The most recent survey -- a federally financed $420,000 feasibility study for the Bridgeport Port Authority released last month -- said service could succeed without a subsidy. The study used questionnaires from 376 Metro-North riders and extrapolated data from the 2000 census to find out how many people drive. The answers showed that a Bridgeport-Stamford run to the East River pier at 34th Street in Manhattan was feasible, but that a ferry to the Wall Street area or to La Guardia Airport was not. This largely mirrored results of a study done last year for transportation and planning groups in New York and Connecticut.
        The newer study determined that to be financially viable, an operator would need to run a minimum of two 175-passenger ferries at full capacity each way. The one-way Stamford trip would have to take less than an hour and cost about $150 a week, nearly twice the cost of a train ticket, though less than it would cost to drive based on pricing models provided by AAA. (Bridgeport would take longer and cost more.)
        Martin Toyen, the chairman of the Connecticut Maritime Commission, a government-appointed advisory panel on matters pertaining to commerce in Long Island Sound, said that ferries tended to be money-losers and that, like other forms of public transportation, should be subsidized. ''I would tell you, they'll probably still lose money,'' Mr. Toyen said.
        Mayor Malloy said Stamford would need financial help from the state and federal governments and perhaps a private developer to secure landing space for ferries and land for parking. ''There's no doubt in my mind it requires subsidization in some fashion,'' he said. ''The reality is all transportation that is successful is subsidized. The question is to what extent would you have to subsidize it to make it successful?''
        Joseph A. Riccio, the executive director of the Bridgeport Port Authority, called the results ''a very conservative estimate'' and said that a potential operator could seek a subsidy. ''The state is highway oriented,'' Mr. Riccio said. ''Up until recently the state had no maritime policy. They don't look to waterways to solve transportation problems.''
        Mr. Riccio said he planned to ask the state to release another $400,000 in federal money for preliminary engineering and design plans and to reach out to potential operators. The critical question is whether once potential operators do their own studies, will they still be interested? If the answer is yes, Mr. Riccio said it would still be a minimum of two years before Connecticut could see ferry service to New York.
        Even then, transit experts and others discount the impact ferry service would have on commuter congestion. Three hundred and fifty commuters each rush hour equals fewer than two Metro-North cars, or three cars a minute over two hours.
        But some, including Mr. Riccio, said ferry service could be worth the wait.
        ''The overwhelming demand for transportation in southwest Connecticut is at an all-time high and is not getting better,'' Mr. Riccio said. ''It's not the silver bullet, but it's a start.''
        TRANSPORTATION
      