
        It started with the chic black dress by Diane von Furstenberg.
        Kimberly Chang, a partner at Acquire d'arte, an art consulting company with offices in Santa Monica, Calif., and Manhattan, had arrived in New York from Los Angeles, but her luggage did not. Desperate as she prepared for dinner that evening with important clients, she noticed a brochure in her room at the W Hotel in Union Square offering for sale almost anything she saw in the hotel, plus items like women's apparel. She called the concierge, and within minutes several dresses were sent to her room from the hotel's retail shop in Times Square.
        She bought a dress for $320 -- matching underwear came free -- and ''all the other girlie accessories I needed,'' she said. ''It turned out to be the easiest shopping I've ever done in New York.''
        Now she uses the service to buy gifts for clients, and she plans to do her Christmas shopping at the store's online site.
        Hotels sell a lot more than sleep these days. Moving well beyond the terry cloth robes, minibar items and overpriced jewelry for sale in the lobby shops, they have become miniature malls, putting a price tag on nearly whatever you see, hear, taste, touch and smell during your stay. You can even buy more of the amenities you find in the bathroom.
        This trend ''makes great sense for both the seller and the buyer,'' said Alan J. Fuerstman, founder and chief executive of Montage Hotels and Resorts. ''The guest takes home an emotional reminder of a memorable stay and the hotel plants a marketing seed where he or she lives, literally.'' His luxury property in Laguna Beach, Calif., has sold $1.5 million worth of merchandise since opening in 2003. ''People now even ask how they can buy our particular shade of wall paint,'' he said.
        Westin Hotels started the trend in 1999 with its popular and comfortable Heavenly Bed, now also available at Nordstrom stores. Some 30,000 have been sold, for $1,250 to $1,450.
        Now other hotels sell beds, including Sofitel with its MyBed collection, sold through its SoBoutique; the W Group through its W The Store; all Four Seasons and Ritz-Carltons; and the Kimpton Group, whose KimptonStyle program offers plush mattress sets -- for which Benjamin S. Farrah, his wife and his mother give thanks. Karen Farrah said she bought the bed from the Topaz, a Kimpton hotel in Washington, after she noticed that her husband, the chief financial officer of the International Resources Group, a Washington environmental firm, ''was sleeping better at the hotel than at home, much to my chagrin.''
        Using points from Kimpton's loyalty reward program, the couple bought three Kimpton box springs and mattresses ($1,295 to $2,195). They have another on order for his mother, Sheila Farrah, who slept on the bed and ''wants nothing else for Christmas,'' Karen Farrah said.
        Westin's latest entry into hotel-based shopping capitalizes on the powerful relationship between olfactory sense and memory. A scent called White Tea, which permeates all Westin lobbies, now sells as an oil, candle and stick ($25 to $65) through the company's Westin at Home Web site.
        Appealing to the auditory sense, the Hotel Gansevoort in the meatpacking district of Manhattan leaves a CD in its rooms called ''A Night at the Gansevoort.'' Katie Himes, an account coordinator for Do It Outdoors, a national mobile billboard company in York, Pa., had noticed the music in the lobby when she checked in. When she saw the CD ($19.50) in the room, she chose it for her company's VIP party in the hotel.
        ''It's chill music, upbeat but not overbearing,'' she said. ''Everyone enjoyed it.'' She bought one for herself and several for friends. ''The first cut is 'Hudson Rise,' and when I listen to it in Pennsylvania, it gives me that downtown vibe,'' she said. ''I feel hip by association.''
        Upscale amenities have turned hotel bathrooms into shopping centers as well, winning devoted buyers. After staying at the Hotel Vitale in San Francisco, Jay Huyler, an event marketing manager for Microsoft in that city, says he has become ''addicted to the Fresh line of shaving cream,'' which the hotel sells for $38. ''I take it with me on all business trips.'' He allowed that ''it's a bit of an aphrodisiac'' for him and his wife Jessica Aguirre, a KGO-TV news anchor.
        ''Obsessed'' is how Regina Haas describes her feelings about the soap her husband David Haas, a sports marketing consultant, brought home from the SoHo Grand Hotel in Manhattan last year. Ms. Haas, an account supervisor for the Point Group, a Dallas marketing communications firm, used the Mammoth Minty Scrub Soap from Bliss once and was hooked. ''It smells so strong it opens up your sinuses,'' she said. Even at $16 a bar, ''we love it so much we each unknowingly gave each other a bar last Christmas.''
        Travelers are so used to buying whatever they see at hotels, airports and restaurants now that they bid on items not even for sale.
        Several Lufthansa passengers have asked to purchase the B&B Italia leather couches they saw in the Frankfurt first-class terminal, according to Jennifer Urbaniak, North American communications manager for the airline.
        When Douglas Reeves, chairman of the Center for Performance Assessment, based in Salem, Mass., gave a lecture at the Charles Hotel in Cambridge in September, he saw a portrait that looked eerily like him. It even bore his first name. An inscription read, ''Doug likes to listen to his own lectures.''
        ''I thought it was a joke on me,'' he said. ''When I found out it wasn't, I negotiated with the hotel to buy it.'' Sale price: $1,250.
        Peter Greenberg, the travel editor of NBC's ''Today'' show and author of the book ''Hotel Secrets From the Travel Detective,'' has taken the idea to an extreme. His home in Sherman Oaks, Calif., showcases items bought from 47 hotels around the world, including a bathtub from the Hong Kong Peninsula, light sconces from the Park Hyatt Sydney and door locks from the St. Regis in New York. Among his favorites is a 300-pound hand-carved teak parlor door ($500) that he had he admired at the Four Seasons Bangkok.
        ''Now,'' he said, ''I welcome houseguests with this caveat: there's a three-night minimum and local calls are $1.50.''
        ITINERARIES
        Correction:  December 14, 2006, Thursday  An article on the Itineraries page of Business Day on Tuesday about hotels that offer merchandise for sale rendered incorrectly the inscription in an artwork by Doug Hilson that intrigued Douglas Reeves, chairman of the Center for Performance Assessment, enough to negotiate to buy it. The inscription reads: ''Doug loved his own lectures'' -- not ''Doug likes to listen to his own lectures.''
      