
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Time to Offshore Our Troops'' (Op-Ed, Dec. 12):
        Kudos to Profs. Eugene Gholz, Daryl G. Press and Benjamin Valentino for their assessment of our situation in Iraq and the Persian Gulf region in general.
        For far too long, the United States has had a presence on the ground that in the long term is untenable and certainly not in our overall best strategic interest. Our forces are overburdened, and too many military families are paying the price here at home for our mistakes in Iraq and our insistence on keeping troops throughout a region where we are clearly mistrusted and unwelcome.
        Once we make our decision to scale back and ultimately withdraw from Iraq, no matter how long that takes, we simply must face facts that our presence on the ground is poisonous, invites resentment of the United States and puts our troops at too high a risk. Clearly, as the professors point out, we can more than achieve our objectives and maintain order with a strong naval presence.
        The other factor to consider is our reliance on Middle East oil. We have basically treated this region as our gas station, and the time has come to rethink our overall position in this region. While the Iraq Study Group's report is not nirvana, it gives us a reason to reassess our position for the long term in this terribly troubled region.
        MATTHEW STAGER  Madison, Conn., Dec. 12, 2006
        To the Editor:
        In ''Time to Offshore our Troops,'' the authors go beyond blaming the military for our situation in the Middle East and claim that its mere presence in the region ''destabilizes our important regional allies.'' As a solution they suggest setting our ground forces outside the region and returning only when ''more substantial threats'' arise.
        Besides the dangerous impracticality of such a strategy, the authors do not mention the real reason we are not succeeding in the region as we would like. It's not the activity of our hard-power assets that destabilizes the area, it's the inactivity of our soft-power assets.
        We shouldn't be evacuating our military; we should be deploying our other agencies in greater numbers. If one wants soft power to get the job done, then one has to start using it -- effectively.
        KEVIN RYAN  Cambridge, Mass., Dec. 12, 2006
        The writer is a retired Army brigadier general and a senior fellow at the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs of the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard.
        To the Editor:
        Just as I thought we had run out of bad options for dealing with our fiasco in Iraq, we are presented with another. How would we feel if a foreign power positioned a naval armada off our coast to protect its ''interests'' and bring ''stability'' to our region?
        GORDON A. GLOVER  South Freeport, Me., Dec. 12, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Withdraw our troops from the entire Middle East? Dream on! That's a far too sensible suggestion backed by a far too bold and rational argument.
        SANDRA SIZER  Boston, Dec. 12, 2006
      