
        One upshot of last week's all-talk, no-action economic meetings in Beijing is that it will be harder for the Bush administration to fend off knee-jerk protectionism from Congress. Another, we fear, is that the administration will twist its lack of progress into yet another excuse to continue its misguided economic policies at home.
        Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson and his power delegation -- including a third of President Bush's cabinet and the chairman of the Federal Reserve -- spent two days lecturing the Chinese about what they should be doing to improve the global economy. The flaw is that both countries are responsible for the serious imbalances in trade and finance. The administration would have a far better chance of persuading Beijing to shift policies if it made clear what it was prepared to do differently.
        There is no question that China's currency, the yuan, is undervalued, giving Chinese exporters an unfair advantage and deepening the United States' trade deficit. But the yuan is not the main culprit behind America's indebtedness or competitive difficulties. Nor can it explain subpar job growth, weak wage gains and growing inequality of income. Those problems are mostly homegrown, with roots in bad domestic policies, including enormous deficit-financed tax cuts and a corresponding dearth of public investment and private savings.
        To ensure America's security and competitiveness -- and to take the lead in correcting global imbalances -- Washington has to start on a harder and higher road: saving more, borrowing less, investing in infrastructure and education, and building a safety net for workers displaced by a global economy.
        Mr. Paulson tucked a pledge to improve America's savings rate into his closing remarks at the Beijing meeting. But so far, his main idea for saving federal dollars is cutting Social Security spending, essentially repackaging Mr. Bush's failed attempt to ''reform'' the program in 2005.
        The United States is right to be tough with China in trade talks. Beijing must take greater responsibility for its side in trade disputes, especially those involving intellectual property. It also needs to start weaning itself from export-driven growth in favor of greater domestic demand, including adopting a more flexible yuan. Whatever China does or does not do, the United States has to cure its own ills. It should start by admitting that most of its problems are of its own making.
        Editorial
      