
        President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad suffered a significant setback in nationwide elections held on Friday for municipal councils and a key supervisory body, with voters evidently rebuking him for failing to deliver on promises to improve the economy.
        Although results from the councils were still coming in on Monday, the tally so far indicated that candidates from the reformist and pragmatic conservative camps -- the two main groups opposing the populist, hard-line president -- emerged stronger from the vote. Presidential allies took a drubbing in important cities.
        Municipal elections reflect the voters' feelings on basic concerns like growing unemployment and the slumping real estate market, according to analysts inside Iran and overseas. Domestic problems eclipse the more notorious issues to which the president has drawn international attention, like developing nuclear technology or questioning the Holocaust.
        ''He has been trying to make himself indispensable by the grandiose issues, but his fate is much more tied to these bread and butter issues,'' said Vali Nasr, the author of ''The Shia Revival'' and a professor of Middle Eastern politics at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, Calif. ''It's not a fall for Ahmadinejad, but it's clearly a stumble; there is no momentum coming out of his election in 2005.''
        Two contenders in that 2005 presidential election could claim important victories this time around, both seen as setbacks for the president. One, Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, himself a former president, won an overwhelming victory to head the 86-member Assembly of Experts. While it has little day-to-day power, the assembly could end up choosing the next supreme leader, the religious figure whose word is virtually law.
        The other, Mohammad Baqer Qalibaf, who succeeded Mr. Ahmadinejad as mayor of Tehran, and who has been hinting at corruption in the previous government, was almost certain to retain his post. He is seen as a ''pragmatic conservative.''
        ''The fact that the reformists and the pragmatic conservatives can produce this kind of performance in an election means they have life in them and that President Ahmadinejad is vulnerable on several fronts,'' Mr. Nasr said.
        Reformist politicians beat hard-liners in at least five important city councils, including Kerman, Sari, Zanjan, Ahvaz and Bandar Abbas.
        ''I think the first message of people's vote on Friday was that people still favor reforms,'' said Mohammad Atrainfar, a reformist politician. ''The second message was that populist appeals have failed.''
        The president's office sought to play down the results. A government spokesman, Gholamhossein Elham, said Monday that the government had not favored any particular slate.
        The most intriguing race, and the biggest prize, is the 15-member Tehran City Council, with Mayor Qalibaf's slate expected to dominate. Mehrdad Bazrpash, an adviser to the president, failed to attract voters, but the president's sister, Parvin Ahmadinejad, who has no political background, was in 11th place.
        Reformists, who support constitutional change to dilute the power of the clerics, captured four of the 15 seats in Tehran. That led them to protest the possibility of tampering, because results are taking longer than expected and an Ahmadinejad ally is in charge of the count. Reformists tend to do well when the turnout is high; this time about 60 percent of eligible voters went to the polls.
        Final results for the Assembly of Experts show that more than 65 candidates close to Mr. Rafsanjani won. A cleric considered the president's spiritual mentor, Ayatollah Muhammad Taqi Mesbah-Yazdi, won a seat, but few of his allies did.
        In the inexact science of reading alliances within the competing circles of mullahs and military men, there have been signs that the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, is not enchanted with the bruising the president is giving Iran's reputation abroad.
        Some Ahmadinejad allies were disqualified as candidates before the vote, and a protest against the president when he visited a Tehran university this month was shown on state television, which the supreme leader controls. He continues to praise the government in public.
        Mr. Ahmadinejad had promised to distribute oil wealth more evenly, providing hospitals, schools and jobs, and to crack down on corruption. None has been realized.
        The tension between the president and Tehran's mayor creates an interesting dynamic because both were Revolutionary Guards.
        Mr. Ahmadinejad is more identified with the Basij, a volunteer paramilitary force drawn mostly from the working poor, whereas Mr. Qalibaf was the head of the air force and projects a more sophisticated image friendly to business executives.
        So the question is whether the supreme leader, and by extension the ruling circle of clerics and military men, sees the populist or the more business-oriented route as the path Iran should take. The slates that won in some municipal councils were claimed by both reformists and Mr. Qalibaf's followers, and analysts are waiting to see if that alliance holds for next year's parliamentary vote.
        ''The significance of this election is that we now have a complete new alignment -- the reformists, the Rafsanjani camp and the conservative bazaar elements,'' said Abbas Milani, chairman of Iranian studies at Stanford University. ''That is a de facto coalition whose purpose is to stop Ahmadinejad from doing further damage, both domestically and internationally.''
      