
        CRICHTON AND THE CRITICS: Michael Crichton's new novel, ''Next,'' about the implications of genetic engineering, is No. 2 in its first week here. Is Crichton mellowing? This book hasn't been as polarizing as ''State of Fear'' (2004), a polemic that made global-warming worrywarts out to be chumps and ninnies. Critics have been split down the middle about ''Next.'' In The Times, Janet Maslin wrote that it had a ''scary legitimacy.'' An Entertainment Weekly critic, though, called the book ''a gift bag of priceless bad writing.'' The Wall Street Journal went to the science writer Matt Ridley for its review. Ridley's assessment was mixed. But he opened with a comically suave assessment of how Crichton might, in one of his own novels, describe himself: ''The author stretched his enormously long legs across the desk and used one of his size-14 tasseled loafers to straighten the picture of his beautiful girlfriend on the far wall. Tossing the manuscript on the futon, he pulled the tab on another Diet Coke. The book looked good, he thought, no question -- darned good, in fact. Sure, some of it was a bit exaggerated. The scientist characters were all pathologically greedy, but, hey, that's commerce. He had movie rights to sell.''
        CHECKING IN: Richard Powers's novel ''The Echo Maker'' won a National Book Award last month, but it hasn't quite made it to the hardcover fiction list. (Since 2000, only one N.B.A. fiction winner -- Jonathan Franzen's ''Corrections'' -- has appeared here in hardcover. No such luck for the winning novels by, in chronological order, Susan Sontag, Julia Glass, Shirley Hazzard, Lily Tuck and William T. Vollmann.) According to ''The Dog Dialed 911,'' a new book from the editors of The Smoking Gun Web site, ''Richard Powers'' is a name Dennis Quaid uses to check into hotels. There's got to be a Haruki Murakami-ish novel in that fact for someone.
        HERO CAMP: ''The President swiveled in his chair, clasped his hands behind his head, and stared unseeing out of the window of the Oval Office and cursed his lot.'' That's the first sentence of Clive Cussler's classic pop thriller ''Raise the Titanic'' (1976) -- a classic to me anyway, it being the first book (after the memoirs of the Pittsburgh Steelers running back Rocky Bleier) I bought, myself, in hardcover, using my own fifth-grade allowance. Thirty years later, what's not to like about Clive Cussler? He founded the National Underwater and Marine Agency (NUMA) so he could dive to shipwrecks like his hero, Dirk Pitt. He named his son Dirk. He's even begun to write himself into his own novels, sometimes as the guy who saves the day. Cussler lives full-time in a literary version of a baseball fantasy camp -- call it Hero Camp. Cussler still makes the best-seller list. His new one, ''Treasure of Khan,'' written with his son, is No. 5 this week. A reviewer on Amazon.com got at one of the reasons I probably liked ''Raise the Titanic'' so much: ''Cussler writes sex scenes and romantic interludes like a 14-year-old -- all climax, no build-up.''
        DWIGHT GARNER
        TBR
      