
        TO understand the problem facing snowshoe makers today, look no further than the snowboarding prodigy Shaun White. He wows. His wild orange hair flops beneath a sticker-bedecked helmet. He has an acrobatic repertoire of 360s, McTwists and Method Airs that children instinctively want to ape.
        It's enough to make the snowshoe industry want to scream.
        After the under-18 crowd has admired the jumps, twists and turns of the talented Mr. White, why would they be satisfied to simply plod through snow?
        ''It's difficult,'' said Bryan Kuhn, a sales manager for Redfeather Snowshoes. ''People, especially the youth, tend to see snowshoeing as an old person's sport. You know, 'Snowshoeing's for the folks that can't snowboard,' 'Snowshoeing's for the folks that can't ski.' ''
        To compete, snowshoe industry executives have developed muscular marketing campaigns aimed at children. They regularly hit the road, hawking their shiny aluminum wares to captive audiences at schools. They have successfully encouraged physical education teachers to buy their equipment with federal grants. National Snowshoe Day, an annual event held at 100 ski areas and Nordic centers, allows families to try snowshoeing for free.
        Their industry is small (only 5.5 million people snowshoe nationwide) and they have tight marketing budgets (Tubbs has only $25,000 to spend annually on youth marketing). But in an effort to increase participation, the industry is trying to make its pitch as cool as possible.
        ''Kids to us represent the most pivotal segment we market to,'' said Kathy Murphy, the general manager of Tubbs. ''Quite frankly, the momentum of our school program is really the catalyst for growth in the sport.''
        Whether wearing animal costumes attracts new participants is for children and their money-wielding parents to decide.
        ''We bring Tubbscout, who is our furry mascot,'' said Ms. Murphy, referring to the hundreds of presentations she has given at public and private schools nationwide. ''We'll come with cones and signage, flags and course markers, balloons and stickers. We'll have start and finish banners if we're doing racing.''
        Other makers resort to an innocuous sort of bribery to make the youngest associate snowshoeing with good times. ''You just have to find a way to bait the program,'' said Michael Messler, the president of Whitewoods USA, a snowshoe maker in Mahwah, N.J. ''Let's say I tell a group of young kids that I've hidden five candy bars in a certain outdoor area, and give them snowshoes so that they can go look for them.''
        In a way, the beleaguered snowshoe makers have taken a page from the makers of cigarettes and foods with trans fats. ''Getting them in young is a surefire way to make customers for life,'' said Mr. Kuhn, 29; it is ''critical to keeping this industry alive.''
        Even though snowshoeing has long had a reputation for being tedious, participation has grown in recent years. A third of all snowshoers are between 16 and 24, according to a study by the Outdoor Industry Foundation, a nonprofit group promoting outdoor recreation nationwide. Participation among that demographic grew to 1.6 million participants in 2005, an increase of 67 percent since 1998.
        Statistics are not kept for children younger than 16, but Ms. Murphy said that this year her company has nearly doubled the number of snowshoes it sold in 2003.
        Mr. Messler also has noticed an increase. ''The sales numbers for children's sizes have gone up, no doubt about it,'' he said.
        The three manufacturers partly attribute their growth to technological innovations. In the early '90s, snowshoes changed from the wood frame, leather-binding heavyweights of millennia past to a lightweight metal construction with urethane decks and easier-to-use binding systems.
        ''A lot of people think of the wood frame snowshoes of hundreds of years ago,'' said Ryan Alford, the owner and publisher of Snowshoe Magazine. ''But the modern day snowshoes look and feel almost cool.''
        But makers say what really moved the needle were their painstaking efforts to introduce children to snowshoeing through schools, recreation centers and organizations like the Boy Scouts of America. Some troops do snowshoe.
        Tubbs even started a Web site to encourage children to send postcards to Tubbscout, the selfsame friendly human-in-a-dog-suit who visits schools. The children don't realize that the company is conducting market research.
        Educators, who have eagerly incorporated snowshoes into curriculums, have been of particular help in promoting the sport. No official numbers exist, but manufacturers and physical education teachers estimate that well over 1,000 institutions nationwide use snowshoes. Most are worn to work up a sweat in gym classes, but the shoes also come in handy for science field trips after snowfalls of six inches or more.
        Some teachers find snowshoes help children maintain stable footing in deep snow. ''We have long winters,'' said Aaron Loukes, a physical education teacher in Lincoln, N.H. ''We're looking for ways to get outside as much as possible.''
        Other teachers prize snowshoes because they are for everyone. ''You don't have to be athletic,'' said Jeannie Trautman, a physical education teacher in Great Falls, Va., who started her fifth- and sixth-grade students using them in 2004. Despite the fact that they mostly trudged on grass, not snow, she said, ''a lot of the kids got snowshoes for Christmas.''
        Lynn Kemmerer, mother of two children at Great Falls School, said they have enjoyed family outings on rented snowshoes. But she's holding off on buying pairs, because her children only ever think of snowshoeing after they have been sledding and made snowmen.
        Snowshoes are a tougher sell for teenagers. ''You're not going to have everybody jumping out of their pants like really excited about it,'' Mr. Loukes said.
        And even the high schoolers who enjoy snowshoeing in class don't necessarily invest in gear. Ryan McIntosh, 17, a senior at Lin-Wood School in Lincoln, N.H., thought snowshoeing was a laugh when he tried it in Mr. Loukes's class as a freshman. Still, none of his friends have bought snowshoes.
        Even Mr. Messler of Whitewoods USA admitted his children, 11 and 9, won't hear of snowshoeing. ''Let's call a spade a spade,'' he said. ''If I said to one of my kids, 'Do you want to go snowshoeing in the woods, or do you want to go snowboarding?' I know what they're going to say.''
        Why? ''It's very peaceful,'' he said, ''and that may not dovetail with kids completely.''
        On the other hand, Christie Goddard, 11, of Great Falls, Va., said that snowshoeing's leisurely pace appealed to her more than skiing. ''I'm not a big fan of fast,'' she said.
        Intermittent snowfall poses another problem. ''The lack of snow is always a concern,'' said Mr. Kuhn of Redfeather, and it is the source of jokes among company representatives. ''You know, 'Oh, the planet's getting warmer, we're going to be out of business soon.' ''
        Correction:  December 28, 2006, Thursday  An article Dec. 14 about the snowshoe industry's attempt to increase sales misstated the name of an annual event to promote snowshoeing. It is Winter Trails Day, not National Snowshoe Day.
      