
        The Ernie Accorsi Era for the Giants started after the 1997 season, when he took over as the general manager when George Young retired. Nine years later, it is Accorsi who is retiring at season's end. In many ways, he will be judged by the future performance of quarterback Eli Manning, right, acquired in a draft-day trade with the San Diego Chargers in 2004. Here are some of the other players who will help define Accorsi's legacy with the Giants.
        JOHN BRANCH
        HITS
        QB Kerry Collins (acquired: 1999) A controversial acquisition because of personal problems and declining statistics, Collins was resurrected with the Giants, playing five seasons and leading the 2000 team to the Super Bowl.
        LT Luke Petigout (1999) The Giants' first choice in the draft (19th over all), who is currently injured, is the respected protector of Manning's back side.
        TE Jeremy Shockey (2002) Accorsi moved up a spot in the first round of the draft to choose Shockey, who has made three Pro Bowls in four years.
        DE Osi Umenyiora (2003) Chosen in the second round, he was coveted by the Chargers as part of the Manning trade. Accorsi held firm, and Umenyiora became a premier rusher.
        G David Diehl (2003) Chosen in the fifth round, the starting left guard is one of several key players chosen on the second day of the draft. Others include linebacker Brandon Short, receiver David Tyree, safety Gibril Wilson, running back Brandon Jacobs and defensive tackle Barry Cofield.
        MLB Antonio Pierce (2005) Signed as a free agent, Pierce has been the defense's most consistent player and its main font of attitude.
        WR Plaxico Burress (2005) Signed as a free agent, the tall and lanky Burress has become the team's best big-play receiver -- and a constant source of mild off-field controversy.
        P Jeff Feagles (2003) He had already played 15 seasons when he signed as a free agent, but he seems to have become better.
        MISSES
        RB Ron Dayne (2000) The Giants' top pick (11th over all) in the draft, Dayne is Accorsi's biggest miscalculation. The silver lining: Dayne's shortcomings fueled the dependence on Tiki Barber, and Brandon Jacobs may become the bruising back Dayne was not.
        LB LaVar Arrington (2006) Signed last spring, Arrington brought a positive resolve and a few games of decent play before his season ended with an Achilles' injury. He hopes to return in 2007.
        CB's Will Allen and Will Peterson (2001) Accorsi never found a Pro Bowl-caliber defensive back, and fell short by using the first two choices of the draft on Allen and Peterson.
        DT William Joseph (2003) A first-round choice, Joseph has struggled to slip into the lineup past lesser-known players, and finds playing time mostly thanks to injuries.
        WR Joe Jurevicius (1998) He was getting better each season when the Giants let him slip away in free agency in 2002. He played in Super Bowls with Tampa Bay and Seattle, and the Giants went through a forgettable cast of replacements until Burress arrived.
        LB Carlos Emmons (2004) The Giants snagged him from the rival Eagles in free agency. He has struggled with injuries and struggled to make a big impact when healthy.  PRO FOOTBALL
      