
        Hector Saliva battled many illnesses in his life, but when his wife, Alfida Figueroa, 42, remembers him, she does not describe a sick man.
        ''He was a big, loud, hardheaded, Puerto Rican man,'' she said, smiling. ''Tall, very tall, also. He would laugh and fill the room with his laughter.''
        Ms. Figueroa sat in a Manhattan apartment with her two children, Melanie Figueroa, 14, and Jaime Saliva, 10. Christmas lights glowed on the windowsill as she remembered her husband of 10 years.
        ''We met in church,'' she said. Ms. Figueroa lives next door to Grace United Methodist, where she worships and volunteers. Community service was a priority in their marriage: Mr. Saliva worked and Ms. Figueroa volunteered at the church. ''The work in the community is very important,'' she explained. ''To be able to make a difference in somebody's life, it's a goal.''
        In the spring of 2004, Mr. Saliva, then 62, suffered a stroke. He had diabetes and high blood pressure, but experience taught Ms. Figueroa to approach this new illness with hope. ''He went through prostate cancer, and we come to the other side,'' she said. ''We did this before and we can do it now.''
        Mr. Saliva was unable to return to his job as a special education coordinator at the Board of Education, so Ms. Figueroa went to work. In January 2005, she began a part-time job as a front desk attendant at a domestic violence shelter in Harlem.
        With Mr. Saliva on disability, his wife and children were left without health insurance. Jaime and Melanie are asthmatic, and Ms. Figueroa worried about their medical care. The Children's Aid Society Health Care Access Program, one of seven agencies supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, helped them obtain Medicaid.
        After a second stroke in the spring of 2005, Mr. Saliva's condition deteriorated. He became slow, disoriented, forgetful and incontinent. He was in constant pain, but Ms. Figueroa said, ''The more difficult part for him -- he wasn't able to be independent any more.''
        In February, Mr. Saliva went into the hospital after a third stroke. He died on March 15 at 64.
        In the midst of her grief, Ms. Figueroa had to deal with debts. The family had fallen behind on rent and bills, and she now had to pay for a funeral.
        Friends and her pastor lent her money. She found more help through Ruth Gonzalez, her health care facilitator at the Children's Aid Society. Every nine months, they meet to review Ms. Figueroa's Medicaid eligibility. They met shortly after Mr. Saliva died, and Ms. Gonzalez learned about Ms. Figueroa's financial struggle. She arranged for Neediest Cases money to pay bills and back rent.
        Neediest Cases money covered $1,547.40 in late fees and owed rent on the family's two-bedroom apartment. In addition, Neediest Cases money was used to pay half of a Consolidated Edison bill of $134.39 and to pay a phone bill of $62.15. Ms. Figueroa was also given a $100 gift certificate to buy food.
        Ms. Figueroa is now a supervisor at the domestic violence shelter. She oversees the front desk and security staff members and plans activities for the residents twice a week. She earns about $1,600 a month and receives $368 a month from her husband's Social Security benefit. She is able to cover her $794 monthly rent and keep up to date on her bills.
        The help she received from friends, her church and the Neediest Cases Fund got Ms. Figueroa through a rough spot. ''It was like a light at the end of the tunnel,'' she said of the donated money and generosity. ''It was mind-blowing for me.''
        This year has been full of painful changes for Ms. Figueroa and her children. This September also brought changes for the better. Everybody started at new schools.
        Melanie is a freshman at Manhattan Village Academy High School, where she plays a clarinet in the band. She also plays a bass guitar at church on Sundays.
        Jaime is a fifth grader at Harlem Village Academy, a charter school.
        Jaime is learning to like his new school. ''I made a lot of friends, and I'm getting to know the school,'' he said. Ms. Figueroa said: ''He's doing very good. A's and B's for the first time.''
        And Ms. Figueroa is making good on a promise that she made to her husband. She is attending morning classes at Boricua College. ''We make a pact that after we get married he will finish school, and then I will go,'' she said.
        Ms. Figueroa has found solace at church and in a greater sense of her community. ''I wasn't sure about the work that we were doing in the community until Hector passed and I saw the community really come together,'' she said. ''The day of the funeral, the church was packed.''
        Ms. Figueroa is still learning to live without her husband. ''I miss him a lot because he was my friend more than anything else. We used to laugh a lot.''
        Previously recorded: $2,950,061.49  Recorded Wednesday: $11,951.00  Total: $2,962,012.49  Last year to date: $3,108,757.41
        HOW TO HELP
        Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
        BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street  Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217
        CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street  Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201
        CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue  New York, N.Y. 10022
        CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22nd Street  New York, N.Y. 10010
        COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22nd Street  New York, N.Y. 10010
        FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South  New York, N.Y. 10010
        UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station  P.O. Box 4100  New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
        No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
        Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of NYCharities.org, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
        The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
        Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
        To delay may mean to forget.
      