
        Pro football wouldn't be what it is now without Lamar Hunt, its shy sculptor. He not only founded the American Football League in 1959, when the National Football League had only 12 teams, but he also negotiated the 1966 merger treaty that created America's sports spectacle, which he baptized.
        When the club owners were searching for a catchier name than the A.F.L.-N.F.L. Championship Game, he remembered the lively Super Ball that his daughter, Sharron, had bounced over the roof of their Dallas home. As the Kansas City Chiefs' owner, he suggested Super Bowl, which Commissioner Pete Rozelle didn't particularly like but finally accepted.
        If not for Lamar Hunt, the N.F.L. might not have 32 prosperous teams and billion-dollar television deals.
        And with Hunt, 74, in a Dallas hospital with cancer and a collapsed lung, it's time for all those who enjoy pro football to remember, if not to realize, what this man has meant to the sport that transfixes the United States every Sunday. And to know what kind of a man he has been.
        He wisely used his wealth as the youngest son of the Texas oil magnate H. L. Hunt, but he never flaunted it.
        Until a hip problem convinced him to travel in private jets in recent years, he and his wife, Norma, and their family always flew in the economy section. He invariably wore a blue blazer and gray slacks that befit his boyish face. He spoke softly. He wrote thank-you notes. Where some sports club owners blustered and blundered, he blended.
        In the early '70s, some two dozen pro football reporters, awaiting the American Football Conference championship game in Miami, had gathered in the Orange Bowl press lounge to watch the earlier National Football Conference title game on television.
        Hunt, there as the A.F.C. president, arrived late. But without a word, he quickly crouched in order not to block anybody's view, sat on the carpet as a youngster would and stared at the TV screen for the rest of the game. Here was one of pro football's most distinguished executives, but he didn't ask for a seat or try to catch the eye of somebody with a seat. The game was all he needed.
        The game was all he ever needed.
        He played the game as a quarterback at the Hill School outside Philadelphia and as a scrub at Southern Methodist, while wondering why Dallas didn't have a pro football franchise. Actually, a 1952 Dallas team, the Texans, was 1-11 before the franchise moved to Baltimore as the Colts; their 1958 championship victory over the Giants inspired Hunt to try to buy the Chicago (now Arizona) Cardinals and move them to Dallas.
        Spurned by the Cardinals, he decided to organize the rival A.F.L. with two original allies, the oilman Bud Adams in Houston and Max Winter in Minnesota. He added the sportscaster Harry Wismer in New York, Ralph Wilson in Buffalo, Billy Sullivan in Boston, Barron Hilton in Los Angeles, and Bob Howsam in Denver. When Winter defected to the N.F.L., Oakland joined the A.F.L. with Wayne Valley as the owner.
        Although the A.F.L owners were known as the Foolish Club, the N.F.L. took them seriously enough to quietly offer Hunt a franchise, but he didn't abandon his other owners. The A.F.L. began play in 1960; after the 1962 season, Hunt moved his Dallas franchise to Kansas City.
        It took time and a lot of money down the drain, but by early 1966, the A.F.L. -- with a five-year ABC television contract and Joe Namath at quarterback for Sonny Werblin's Jets -- had succeeded in persuading the N.F.L. owners that a merger was best for both leagues.
        On April 4, 1966, at a Love Field parking lot in Dallas, Hunt met secretly with Tex Schramm, the Dallas Cowboys' president, and outlined a 24-team treaty with Pete Rozelle as commissioner, one championship game, a common draft and interleague preseason play in 1967, and a merger in 1970.
        Hunt's teams, with the Hall of Famers Len Dawson, Buck Buchanan, Willie Lanier, Bobby Bell, Jan Stenerud and Coach Hank Stram, were the only three-time A.F.L. champions.
        They represented the A.F.L. in Super Bowl I, losing to Vince Lombardi's Green Bay Packers, 35-10, but they won Super Bowl IV, 23-7, over the Vikings -- a sweet triumph for Hunt, who remembered how Minnesota had defected from the A.F.L.'s original band of brothers.
        ''I'll always think of it as the A.F.L. vs. the N.F.L.,'' he once said. ''We still keep track and always will.''
        He's not just a football guy. In forming World Championship Tennis in the late 1960s, he helped force open tennis tournaments between what were then a few touring pros and traveling shamateurs. He also helped to bankroll Major League Soccer's growth, but no matter what the sport, no matter what the situation, his demeanor never changed.
        The morning after John McEnroe was handed the winner's check at a W.C.T. event more than two decades ago, he had settled into his first-class seat on a jetliner when he looked up to see Lamar Hunt, in his blue blazer and gray slacks, walking past him. Walking to the economy section.
        PRO FOOTBALL
        Correction:  December 15, 2006, Friday  Because of an editing error, a Sports of The Times column yesterday about Lamar Hunt's contribution to professional football omitted the byline and the label. It was by Dave Anderson.
        Correction:  December 23, 2006, Saturday  A Sports of The Times column on Dec. 14 about Lamar Hunt, the main founder of the American Football League, misstated the television network that had a contract to broadcast A.F.L. games in 1966, when the merger with the National Football League was planned. It was NBC, not ABC.
      