
        Ernie Accorsi has packed up nearly everything in his office at Giants Stadium. The last two items he will place in a box when the season ends will be a photograph of him with George Halas, and another of Wellington Mara, the former Giants owner.
        There is little for Accorsi, the retiring Giants general manager, to do anymore. His final team was constructed long ago, and his 36-year N.F.L. career is down to its last few games.
        Accorsi, 65, can only watch as the remainder of his legacy unfolds.
        These Giants, sitting at 7-6 and fighting for a playoff spot, will determine if Accorsi wins his first and only championship as a team builder. Beyond that, the quarterback that Accorsi coveted, Eli Manning, will have a lot to say about how Accorsi is remembered.
        It would seem that this might worry Accorsi. It does not.
        ''I have no interest in my legacy,'' Accorsi said in an e-mail message. He has declined more formal interviews, hoping not to be a distraction to the Giants as they push toward the playoffs.
        ''I don't care what exit polls say,'' Accorsi said. ''Whatever people think of the job I did will be determined on the field by the players that have played for me over a long period of time. How I feel about my work matters to me and, obviously, what people I respect think.''
        By that measure, Accorsi's career is a success, defined mostly by his terms as a general manager for three storied franchises: the Baltimore Colts (1982-83), the Cleveland Browns (1985-92) and the Giants (beginning in 1998, after four years as an assistant to George Young).
        ''He's one of the most outstanding and talented general managers in the business,'' Art Modell, the former owner of the Browns, said in a telephone interview Thursday. ''I didn't realize how good he was until he left me.''
        Modell said he tried to talk Accorsi out of retiring -- ''He's too good a football man to be loafing on the back porch,'' he said -- but this is Accorsi's third and final attempt to leave. He is not turning around again.
        He would have left four years ago, but he did not want his final game to be a brutal playoff loss to the San Francisco 49ers. He would have left last season, but the deaths of the Giants' owners, Mara and Robert Tisch, compelled him to stay to help steer the franchise.
        When Accorsi was named Giants general manager nearly nine years ago, his stated goal was to leave the team in better shape than he found it. He has done so, said John Mara, the team president and co-owner. The team has a stronger personnel department, which includes several candidates for Accorsi's job, and the Giants are not facing any dire salary-cap-inspired roster purges in the next couple of seasons.
        ''The team that we had in '98 was not as good, talent-wise, as the team we have right now,'' Mara said. ''And even though the popular belief seems to be that we're built to win right now, it's almost like saying we don't have a future. Well, I think we have a pretty good future. We have a pretty good core of young players that have a lot of upside, and he's more responsible for that than anybody.''
        Those are the types of opinions that matter to Accorsi, more than any stranger's analysis of his legacy. Since joining the Colts in 1970 as a public-relations director, he has built a reputation as a smart, daring and gentlemanly executive. He has always been friendly and accessible with the news media -- he left a career as a sportswriter to join the Colts -- but has never sought attention.
        ''The thing I admired most about Ernie is that he never gave a damn who got the credit,'' Marty Schottenheimer, the Browns' coach in the mid-1980s under Accorsi and the current Chargers coach, said Thursday by phone.
        Several others, including Carolina Panthers Coach John Fox and New Orleans Saints Coach Sean Payton, both former Giants assistants, eagerly returned calls this week to voice their respect for Accorsi.
        ''He's got great common sense and great tact, in a profession where those traits are missing sometimes,'' Payton said.
        Michael Lombardi, who worked for Accorsi in Cleveland and is a senior personnel executive for the Oakland Raiders, said: ''Ultimately, we're judged over the tapestry of our career. At the end of the day, Ernie's a winner.''
        But that tapestry is not complete, and it may not be until Manning's career is complete. It is fitting. Accorsi spent most of his career seeking the next great quarterback -- namely, the next Johnny Unitas, a hero to Accorsi -- and the championship he thought would follow.
        He selected John Elway with the first pick of the 1983 draft, despite Elway's insistence that he would never play for the Colts. Elway was traded to the Denver Broncos days later, a deal consummated by the Colts' owner, Robert Irsay, without Accorsi's knowledge. Accorsi learned of it on television and resigned.
        With the Browns, he coyly snared Bernie Kosar in the supplemental draft -- stirring a dispute with other teams over league rules, which were subsequently changed -- and built a perennial playoff team. The Browns made the American Football Conference championship game three times. They lost all of them, twice in the final moments to Elway's Broncos.
        With the Giants, Accorsi's first bold quarterback move was the 1999 signing of Kerry Collins, awash in personal problems and with his career in apparent decline. Collins, resurrected, played five seasons with the Giants and helped them to the Super Bowl in the 2000 season, which they lost to the Baltimore Ravens.
        Accorsi would love to win a championship, of course -- he has a Super Bowl ring from the 1970 season with the Colts -- but he knows that it is out of his hands now.
        ''If it doesn't happen, I can live with it,'' Accorsi said. ''I did my best.''
        There is a fascinating dichotomy about Accorsi. He is a passionate caretaker of football history, with encyclopedic knowledge of the N.F.L. and a yarn for every occasion. Each story has a moral; some include Earl Morrall. As Lombardi said, ''Ernie has a doctorate in this industry.''
        But as the final games of his career play out, Accorsi has little sentimentality about it.
        ''The games are too much agony for me now, for me to feel nostalgic and melancholy,'' Accorsi said.
        That has little to do with his retirement. The games have long been the most painful part of his job. There is a helpless feeling that comes from assembling all the pieces but having no control over how they fit together on game day.
        ''I really haven't felt any emotion with one exception,'' Accorsi said. ''On Sunday night, about an hour after the draft ended last spring -- while there was still a lot of activity going on in the draft room signing free agents -- I stopped, turned around and looked at the room for the last time with all those scouts and coaches in it. I will miss that feeling of teamwork and togetherness of the draft room.''
        It is appropriate, then, that Accorsi will be most remembered for the draft-day deal that landed Manning, a perfect career bookend to the Elway saga. Manning did not want to play with the Chargers, who chose him with the top pick.
        Accorsi, in a role reversal, traded for Manning. He packaged the fourth selection, quarterback Philip Rivers, with more draft picks.
        The move was universally lauded at the time. Hindsight has allowed for criticism.
        Rivers is having a better season than Manning, and the Chargers are 11-2. The Chargers parlayed the other picks into key contributors: linebacker Shawne Merriman and place-kicker Nate Kaeding.
        Accorsi has no regret. Asked about his favorite deals, he mentioned the Kosar pick and a trade he made in 1983, securing kicker Raul Allegre with an 11th-round draft choice.
        ''But in my mind,'' Accorsi said, ''the Manning deal will turn out to be the best one because he is going to be a championship quarterback.''
        It could happen as early as this season. It could take a few years, or it may never happen. It is out of Accorsi's hands.
        He can only watch, finish packing and complete his plans to spend March in Florida at spring training, September driving around the country to address his must-see list -- certain baseball parks, Mount Rushmore, Yellowstone National Park, the Eisenhower and Truman libraries, even the ''Field of Dreams'' cornfield in Iowa.
        After the Giants play their final game this season, Accorsi will box away the final two photographs, the one with Halas, the other with Wellington Mara. And he will take them home, across the Hudson River, from the Meadowlands to Manhattan.
        He will lift them out and place them on a shelf. And he will move on. In his mind, the legacy is as secure as the memories.
        PRO FOOTBALL
      