
        Bosch has jumped the chain of command to brief the chief of police on the feds' involvement in the case and what seems to be an effort to shut the L.A.P.D. out. The chief has agreed to go to bat for Bosch but admonishes him to never breach protocol again.
        Bosch got to the federal building in downtown just before the meeting was supposed to start. He came alone. After going through the law-enforcement entrance, he took the elevator up to 14 and was greeted by Brenner as soon as the doors opened. The word that Bosch was in the building had obviously been sent up from below.
        ''Come with me,'' Brenner said.
        He didn't wait for a reply. He headed down a hallway, and Bosch followed. Brenner threw his questions over his shoulder as he walked.
        ''Where's your partner?'' he asked.
        ''I dropped him off at Parker Center,'' Bosch said.
        ''Why? He should be here.''
        ''Because I can handle this by myself, and besides, I thought it would be safer for him there. I don't want you people leaning on him to get to me.''
        Brenner suddenly stopped, pivoted sharply and was in Bosch's face.
        ''Do you know what you are doing, Bosch? You're compromising an investigation that could have far-reaching implications. Where is the witness?''
        ''Where's Alice Kent?''
        Brenner shook his head but didn't answer.
        ''Wait in here,'' he said. ''I'll go get her.''
        Brenner opened a door that had the number 1411 on it and stepped back for Bosch to enter. As he walked through the door, Bosch saw that it was a small interview room similar to the one he had spent time in that morning with Jesse Mitford. Bosch was suddenly shoved into the room from behind and turned just in time to see Brenner pulling the door closed from out in the hallway.
        ''Hey!''
        Bosch grabbed for the doorknob, but it was too late. The door was locked. He pounded on it twice but knew Brenner was not about to open it. He turned away and looked at the small space he was confined in. Similar to the L.A.P.D.'s, the interview room contained only three items of furniture -- a small square table and two chairs. Assuming there was a camera somewhere he raised his hand and shot his middle finger into the air. He gave his hand a twirl to emphasize the message.
        Bosch pulled out one of the chairs and sat down on it backward, ready to wait them out. He took his cellphone out and opened it. He knew that if they were watching him, they wouldn't want him calling out and reporting his situation -- it could be embarrassing for the bureau.
        Almost immediately the door opened and Rachel Walling stepped in. She closed the door, took the chair opposite Bosch and quietly sat down.
        ''I was wondering if you'd turn up again,'' Bosch said. ''I'm getting tired of dealing with your partner.''
        ''It's not a good time for humor, Harry.''
        ''Yeah, I think I've heard that before. Why am I here?''
        ''Because you've been running around like a thief in a jewelry store, smashing every glass case you see.''
        ''I'm just trying to solve a homicide.''
        She leaned across the table, and Bosch could clearly see her anger.
        ''Yes, trying to solve a homicide at the possible cost of endangering the entire city with this petty, selfish and self-righteous insistence on -- ''
        ''Come on, Rachel, don't you think I have an idea about what could be at stake here?''
        She shook her head.
        ''Not if you are holding back a key witness from us. Don't you see what you are doing? You have no idea where this investigation is headed because you've been busy hiding witnesses and sucker-punching agents.''
        ''Is that what Maxwell said, that I sucker-punched him?''
        ''It doesn't matter what he said. We are trying to control a potentially devastating situation here, and I don't understand why you are making the moves you are making.''
        Bosch nodded.
        ''That makes sense,'' he said. ''You shut somebody out of his own investigation, and it stands to reason you won't know what he is up to.''
        She held her hands up as if to stop an oncoming train.
        ''O.K., let's just stop everything right here. Talk to me, Harry. What's your problem?''
        Bosch looked at her and then up at the ceiling. He studied the upper corners of the room and dropped his eyes back to hers.
        ''You want to talk? Let's take a walk outside, then we can talk.''
        She didn't hesitate.
        ''O.K., fine,'' she said. ''Let's walk and talk. And then you'll give me the witness.''
        ''And what about the meeting?''
        ''There is no meeting.''
        Bosch nodded. He had seen that a mile away.
        Walling got up and moved to the door. Bosch saw her quickly glance up at an air-conditioning grill high on the back wall, and it confirmed for him that they were on camera. She made three distinctive knocks on the door.
        ''So that's how it's done,'' Bosch said. ''I didn't know the federal combination.''
        He saw her suppress a smile as the door was opened. Brenner and another agent were in the hallway.
        ''We're going to take a little walk,'' Walling said. ''Alone.''
        ''Have a great time,'' Brenner said. ''We'll be in here trying to track the cesium.''
        Walling and Bosch didn't respond. She led him down the hall. When they turned the corner toward the elevator, Bosch heard a voice from another hallway to his left.
        ''Hey, Buddy!''
        He turned just in time to take Agent Maxwell's shoulder in the chest. He was driven into the wall and held against it.
        ''You're a little outnumbered this time, aren't you, Bosch?''
        ''Stop!'' Walling shouted. ''Cliff, stop it!''
        She pulled him off Bosch and pushed him back up the hall. He pointed a finger over her shoulder at Bosch.
        ''Get out of my building, Bosch. Get out and stay out!''
        She gave him a shove into an office. Several other agents came into the hallway to see what the commotion was about.
        ''It's all over,'' Walling announced. ''Everybody go back to sleep.''
        She came back to Bosch and pushed the button for the elevator.
        ''You O.K.?''
        ''Only hurts when I breathe.''
        They took the elevator down to the garage level and walked from there up an incline and out onto Los Angeles Street. She turned right, and he caught up. They were heading away from the noise of the freeway. She checked her watch and then pointed toward an office building of modern design and construction.
        ''There's decent coffee in the Reagan Building,'' she said.
        ''Another federal building,'' Bosch sighed. ''Agent Maxwell might think that's his too.''
        ''Can you drop that, please?''
        He shrugged.
        ''I'm just surprised Maxwell even admitted we came back to the house.''
        ''Why wouldn't he?''
        ''Because I figured he was posted on the house because he was already in the doghouse. Why admit that we got the drop on him and be kept in there longer?''
        ''First of all, no one in Tactical Intelligence is in the doghouse. The work is too important to have anybody on the team who is not up to the task. Secondly, he didn't care what anyone would think. What he did think was that it would be important for everyone to know about the way you are acting and how your lack of control could harm the investigation.''
        She pressed on before Bosch could respond.
        ''Harry, what is wrong with you? We've got enough cesium out there to shut down an airport, and you don't seem all that concerned. You are looking at this like it's a murder. Yes, a man is dead, but that isn't what this is about. It's a heist, Harry. They wanted the cesium, and now they've got it. And it would help us if maybe we could talk to the only known witness. So where is he?''
        ''He's safe. Where's Alice Kent? And where's her husband's partner?''
        ''They're safe. The partner is being questioned here, and we're keeping the wife at Tactical until we are sure we have everything there is to get from her.''
        ''She's not going to be very helpful. She couldn't -- ''
        ''That's where you are wrong. She's already been quite helpful.''
        Bosch couldn't hold back the look of surprise in his eyes.
        ''How? She said she didn't even see their faces.''
        ''She didn't. But she heard a name. When they were speaking to each other, she heard a name.''
        ''What name? She didn't say this before.''
        Walling nodded.
        ''And that is why you should turn over your witness. We have people who have one expertise -- getting information from witnesses. We can get things you were unable to get. We got them from her, we can get them from him.''
        Bosch felt his face turning red.
        ''What was the name this master interrogator supposedly got?''
        She shook her head.
        ''We're not trading, Harry. This is a case involving national security. You're on the outside. And by the way, that's not going to change no matter who you get your police chief to call.''
        Bosch knew then that his meeting at the Donut Hole had been for nothing. Even the chief was on the outside looking in. Whatever name Alice Kent gave up, it must have lit up the federal scoreboard big time.
        ''All I've got is my witness,'' he said. ''I'll trade you straight up for the name.''
        ''Why do you want the name? You're not going to get anywhere near this guy.''
        ''Because I want to know.''
        She folded her arms across her chest and thought about things for a moment. Finally, she looked at him.
        ''You first,'' she said.
        Bosch hesitated while he studied her eyes. Two months earlier, he trusted her with his life. Now, things had changed. Bosch wasn't so sure.
        ''I stashed him at my place,'' he said. ''I think you remember where that is.''
        She pulled a phone from her blazer pocket and opened it to make a call.
        ''Wait a second there, Agent Walling,'' he said. ''What was the name Alice Kent gave you?''
        ''Sorry, Harry.''
        ''We had a deal.''
        ''National security, sorry.''
        She started punching in a number on her cell. Bosch nodded. He had called it right.
        ''I lied,'' he said. ''He's not at my place.''
        She slapped the phone closed.
        ''What is with you?'' she asked angrily. ''We're running more than 13 hours behind the cesium. Do you realize it may already be in a device? It may already be -- ''
        Bosch stepped in close to her.
        ''Give me the name, and I'll give you the witness.''
        ''All right!''
        She pushed him away. He knew she was angry with herself for being caught in the lie.
        ''She said she heard the name Moby, O.K.? She didn't think anything about it at the time because she didn't realize it was actually a name she had heard.''
        ''O.K., who is Moby?''
        ''There is a Syrian terrorist named Momar Azim Nassar. He is believed to be in this country. He is known by friends and associates as Moby because he happens to resemble the performer named Moby.''
        ''Who?''
        ''Never mind. Not your generation.''
        ''But you are sure she heard this name?''
        ''Yes. She gave us the name. And I have now given it to you. Now where is the witness?''
        ''Just hold on. You already lied to me once.''
        Bosch pulled his phone and called his partner. Bosch spoke to him while staring at Walling and watching the anger darken her eyes.
        ''Where are you?'' Bosch asked.
        ''My desk. You told me to stay here. I'm going through everything and putting the murder book together.''
        ''Good. Did you talk to Lieutenant Gandle yet?''
        There was a pause.
        ''No, not yet.''
        ''Good. Can you get to the New York Times archives with your computer?''
        ''Of course.''
        ''All right, do it. I have a name I want you to check.''
        ''Hold on.''
        Several seconds went by. Bosch's phone started to beep because he was getting another call. But he stayed with Ferras, and soon his partner spoke.
        ''What's the name?''
        Bosch put his hand over the phone and asked Walling the full name of the Syrian terrorist again. He then repeated it to Ferras and waited.
        ''Yeah, multiple hits. Going back eight years.''
        ''Give me a rundown.''
        Bosch waited.
        ''Uh, just a bunch of stuff from the Middle East. He's an Al Qaeda sympathizer. He's suspected of involvement in abductions and bombings and so on.''
        ''What's the last story say?''
        ''Uh, let's see. It's about a bus bombing in Beirut. Sixteen people killed. This is Jan. 3, 2003. Nothing after that.''
        ''Does it give any nicknames or aliases?''
        ''Um . . . no. I don't see anything.''
        ''O.K., thanks. I'll call you later.''
        ''Wait a minute. Harry?''
        ''What? I have to go.''
        ''I thought you'd want to know. They just found Alice Kent's car. The Chrys -- ''
        ''Where?''
        ''Just at the bottom of the hill from the overlook. It was dumped off an access road into the reservoir. They just pulled it out.''
        ''They check the trunk?''
        ''The trunk is empty. No cesium. They're taking it to the shed down here.''
        The shed was a hangar behind Parker Center where the forensics unit worked on vehicles.
        ''O.K., I gotta go,'' Bosch said.
        Bosch ended the call and looked at Rachel.
        ''There's nothing in The New York Times about this guy being in this country.''
        ''Because it's not known. That is why her information was so genuine.''
        ''What do you mean? You take her word for it that the guy's in this country just because she heard a word that might not even be a name?''
        ''No, Harry, we know he's in this country. We have video of him checking out the Port of Los Angeles in August. We just didn't get there in time to grab him. We believe he was with another Al Qaeda operative named Muhammad Elfayed. They somehow slipped into this country -- hell, the border's a sieve -- and who knows what they've got planned.''
        ''And you think they have the cesium?''
        ''We don't know that. But the intelligence on Elfayed is that he smokes unfiltered Turkish cigarettes and -- ''
        ''The ashes on the toilet.''
        She nodded.
        ''That's right. They're still being analyzed, but the betting in the office is running 8 to 1 that it was a Turkish cigarette.''
        Bosch nodded and suddenly felt foolish about the moves he had been making, the information he had held back.
        ''We put the witness in the Mark Twain Hotel on Wilcox,'' he said. ''Room 303 under the name Charles Dickens.''
        ''Cute.''
        ''He told us he heard the shooter call out to Allah before he pulled the trigger.''
        She looked at him with the eyes of judgment as she opened her phone again. She pushed a single button and spoke to Bosch while waiting for the connection.
        ''You better hope we get to these people before -- ''
        She cut off when her call was picked up. She delivered the information without identifying herself or giving any sort of greeting.
        ''He's at the Mark Twain on Wilcox. Room 303. Go pick him up.''
        She closed her phone and looked at Bosch. Worse than judgment, he saw disappointment and dismissal in her eyes now.
        ''I have to go,'' she said. ''I'd stay away from airports, subways and the malls until we find that cesium.''
        She turned and left him there. Bosch was watching her walk away when his phone started to buzz again, and he answered without looking away from her. It was Joseph Felton.
        ''Harry, it's been a long night. I've been trying to reach you.''
        ''They're all long, Joe. Same with the days. What's up?''
        ''We just swung by Queen of Angels to make a pickup -- some gangbanger they pulled the plug on after a shooting yesterday in Hollywood.''
        ''Yeah?''
        Bosch knew that the medical examiner wouldn't have called to waste his time. There was a reason.
        ''So we're here now, and I go into the break room to grab some caffeine, and I overhear a couple of paramedics talking about a pickup they just made. They said they brought in a guy with A.R.S., and it just made me wonder if it could be connected with the guy up on the overlook. You know, since he was wearing the radiation-alert rings.''
        Bosch calmed his voice.
        ''Joe, what is A.R.S.?''
        ''Acute radiation syndrome. They are saying they have a pretty bad exposure case here, Harry.''
        Bosch started walking toward Rachel Walling.
        ''Where'd they find this guy?''
        ''I didn't ask, but I assume it was somewhere in Hollywood if they brought him here.''
        Bosch started picking up speed.
        ''Joe, I want you to hang up and get somebody from hospital security to watch this guy. I'm on my way.''
        Bosch clapped the phone closed and began running toward Rachel as fast as he could.
        Next week: A search of the radiation victim's clothes raises more questions than it answers.
        THE FUNNY PAGES: III: SUNDAY SERIAL Previous chapters are online at www.nytimes.com/funnypages.
      