
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Study Questions Colonoscopy Effectiveness'' (news article, Dec. 14):
        Colonoscopy is still helpful. Don't let the perfect be the enemy of the good.
        Admittedly our payment system for procedures -- including colonoscopies -- gives a perverse incentive: Do a marginal job fast and you will make more money. Perhaps the insurance industry, including Medicare, should insist on a minimal time for each procedure and provide incentives for quality care and cognitive work.
        Robert Lebow, M.D.  Southbridge, Mass., Dec. 14, 2006
        To the Editor:
        As a practicing gastroenterologist who has performed thousands of colonoscopies, I found some of the statements made in the article concerning the findings in The New England Journal of Medicine absolutely absurd.
        A new study reported that doctors who took their time doing colonoscopies found more polyps. Dr. Robert L. Barclay is quoted as saying some doctors take ''two or three minutes'' to do a colonoscopy. Dr. Robert E. Schoen goes further and says he has heard of ''people who do it in 30 seconds.''
        To suggest that a highly skilled procedure such as a colonoscopy could ever take that little time defies credulity. I know of no fellow colonoscopist who would or could ever do a complete colonoscopy in 30 seconds or even 3 minutes.
        To suggest that this important procedure can be done or is being done in that short a time denigrates the skill and caring of the doctors dedicated to the prevention of colon cancer.
        David M. Frank, M.D.  Rockville Centre, N.Y.  Dec. 14, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Your Dec. 15 editorial ''High-Speed Colonoscopies'' correlates the detection of colon polyps and cancer with the time spent by the doctor doing the colonoscopy.
        But why limit ourselves to colonoscopy? Time is the most neglected health care resource, and the consequences are felt throughout the health care system.
        The time spent per patient is a function of price controls in the medical system, which limit the payments doctors receive. To meet rising expenses, like malpractice insurance, doctors are forced to increase patient volume.
        This is the dilemma facing the medical profession today, and at the end of the day it will be up to the individual doctor to make the choice he or she can best live with.
        Michael Harel, M.D.  New York, Dec. 15, 2006
      