
        With a wisdom and honesty that seemed precocious for a 10th grader, Shadie Thompson, 15, lowered her eyes and explained why she should not live with her parents in their apartment in Flatbush, Brooklyn.
        ''I don't want to go through all that again,'' she said solemnly, describing as best she could what it was like to watch her mother, Sarah Thompson, suffer the terrors of paranoid schizophrenia.
        Ms. Thompson, 38, was a teenager when the disease was diagnosed, but her symptoms, long in check, re-emerged when Shadie was 6. For the next four years, Shadie remained at her mother's side, taking refuge at a relative's apartment only when her mother's anxiety and tormented pacing became so intense that she had to be hospitalized.
        At home, Ms. Thompson talked to voices only she could hear, paced the rooms, slept erratic hours, and at times could not hold a conversation. She was always nervous. And even after seeing doctors, she often did not follow treatments they prescribed.
        In a recent interview, she said it was her worries about the family's finances that eventually splintered her mental strength.
        Her husband, Livingston, a carpenter who worked without the security or benefits of a union, often struggled to pay the electric bill and the rent, she said. During the times when he could not find work and failed to pay the utility bills, Ms. Thompson and her daughter would go to a shelter.
        During a prolonged stay at one shelter in 2002, workers there became concerned that Ms. Thompson was not taking her medication and reported her to the Administration of Children's Services for neglect. Caseworkers returned Shadie to her father, who decided she should live with her grandmother in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn.
        By then, Shadie was in middle school and had become depressed, telling almost no one about her mother's condition and shrugging off questions from her classmates when her mother missed school events.
        ''I didn't really understand why she was like that,'' Shadie said in a recent interview during a visit to her parents' apartment. ''It was hurting me, and I couldn't express that.''
        In the seventh grade, Shadie finally opened up to an assistant principal at her school, writing her a series of letters in which she revealed that she was thinking about suicide.
        The assistant principal helped her enroll in therapy, which she continued for more than a year. Afterward, she entered high school seemingly transformed.
        With the help of her therapist, Shadie developed into a creative and lively young woman, with dreams of being an actress.
        ''Now I express too much,'' she said, beaming as she listed the plays she had a role in at school.
        But while Shadie found support at school, her parents' troubles deepened.
        In the spring of 2005, Mr. Thompson's right leg began to ache. He said the pain grew so intense that he became convinced that his leg was broken. And when he could no longer walk, Ms. Thompson, by then living with him again, called an ambulance.
        He was taken to Brookdale University Hospital and Medical Center, where the couple learned that the source of his pain was bone cancer, which had begun to spread.
        Mr. Thompson spent a month in the hospital and underwent a course of treatment that included radiation, chemotherapy and, most recently, a bone marrow transplant.
        While Shadie remained at her grandmother's house, the couple were asked to leave the two-bedroom apartment where she was raised. They moved into a one-bedroom ground-floor apartment that a friend rented to them.
        But they had fallen behind on rent, even before Mr. Thompson became sick. The debt only increased when he could not return to work.
        Their friend, fearing that he might have to evict them, contacted a local charity for help, the Jewish Association for Services for the Aged. It is a beneficiary agency of the UJA-Federation of New York, one of the seven agencies supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
        Sheeree Heyward, a caseworker who helps adults younger than 60, said when she met with the family in June 2005, she found Ms. Thompson terribly unstable. Mr. Thompson begged Ms. Heyward to help his wife get treatment.
        With money from Neediest Cases, Ms. Heyward arranged for transportation for the couple to and from their medical appointments, and bought school supplies, a winter coat and boots for Shadie.
        She helped them apply for Supplemental Security Income, reapply for food stamps and work out an arrangement with their landlord, giving them a glimmer of security.
        Although Mr. Thompson, 46, remains weak as he battles cancer, Ms. Heyward said, Ms. Thompson is improving as she wills herself to follow her doctor's orders and to take the prescribed medications.
        ''I always say 'Do it for your daughter,' '' Ms. Heyward said. ''Sarah always says, 'Yeah, I want to get better for my daughter.' ''
        Previously recorded: $3,052,573.28  Recorded Friday: $88,515.57  Total: $3,141,088.85  Last year to date: $3,264,496.41
        HOW TO HELP
        Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
        BROOKLYN BUREAU OF  COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street  Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217
        CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF  BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street  Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201
        CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE  ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue  New York, N.Y. 10022
        CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22nd Street  New York, N.Y. 10010
        COMMUNITY SERVICE  SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22nd Street  New York, N.Y. 10010
        FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT  WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South  New York, N.Y. 10010
        UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station  P.O. Box 4100  New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
        Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of NYCharities.org, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
        No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
        The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
        Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
        To delay may mean to forget.
      