
        In the speculation over what the new Democratic majority will do when it takes power in Washington next month, one political faction has hardly been heard from: the doomsayers. Party shifts always produce party poopers. In 1994, when Republicans retook both houses, a chorus of commentators was there to impugn the new leaders and even to rage against the electorate. The late ABC anchorman Peter Jennings likened the Verdict of the Sovereign People to an infantile tantrum (''Ask parents of any 2-year-old,'' his analysis began). After the post-Watergate election of 1974, which brought dozens of liberals into Congress with a vetoproof majority, Republicans were bloodied but unbowed. Many noted the low turnout; Senator Bob Dole told ''Face the Nation'' that the way to keep the White House in 1976 was to ''toughen up a little.''
        This latest landslide is different. The losers seem to believe they got what was coming to them. In Washington, leaving aside those legislators and staff members whose oxen have been gored most directly, there is little discontent. You can sit at a table full of Republican journalists and consultants and hear them describe feelings ranging from ''relieved'' to ''giddy.'' You might reasonably assume that this reaction is more pronounced the farther you get from Washington. What makes the country so unanimously content with its new leaders?
        Perhaps it's an expectation that Democrats are going to take the country in some excellent new direction. The United States is probably going to become more isolationist (the fallout from Iraq) and more protectionist (the message that most distinguishes this crop of legislators from its predecessors). But beyond that, voters have only the vaguest idea what the Democrats in Congress stand for. A November Gallup poll found that a third of them had never heard of the Democratic Senate leader Harry Reid.
        It could be that Democrats don't come into it. After all, it is easy to show that this election was about George W. Bush. In the Virginia Senate race, the Republican, George Allen, won the votes of 98 percent of those who ''strongly approve'' of the president. Jim Webb, the Democrat, won 95 percent of those who ''strongly disapprove.'' Maybe President Bush has been a president of such trailblazing, standard-setting, nonpareil awfulness that it does not matter who or what follows him. But even if you suspect that history will judge Bush harshly, that alone would not lead people to rejoice in the triumph of his adversaries. Defenders of the just-disgraced Nixon in 1974 and the joyfully cashiered Jimmy Carter in 1980 were full of dire warnings. Why have few such people risen to the defense of George Bush?
        Here is a guess. The recent election feels like something more intimate than a personnel change. It feels like the beginnings of an escape from a twisted relationship. The episodes that the most fed-up people cite against Bush are extraordinarily personal. Those angry at his failure to manage last year's floods in New Orleans will always mention his testimonial to the head of FEMA, Michael Brown, ''Brownie, you're doing a heck of a job.'' You get the impression that the president's chipper tone bugs people as much as the mistaken assessment. More recently, Bush asked incoming Senator Webb how his son, a Marine fighting in Iraq, was faring. ''I'd like to get them out of Iraq,'' Webb said.
        ''That's not what I asked you. How's your boy?''
        ''That's between me and my boy, Mr. President.''
        This testy but perfectly proper exchange between ideological adversaries made newspapers all over the country.
        Why are opinions so personal when it comes to President Bush? Because he has frequently sought, like the child of the 1960s that he is, to blur the line between the personal and the political. Posing as an amiable guy rather than a partisan politician has great advantages in democratic power politics. Even if not all of them vote for you, most Americans want to believe that their president is a jolly good fellow. But when a politician makes likability a substitute for authority, his opponents make hatred a substitute for opposition. Some people marveled at Clinton's empathy. But the people who hated it, hated it. His claim to ''feel your pain'' enraged many.
        The British correspondent Martin Walker titled his book on Clinton ''The President We Deserve.'' Clinton practiced leadership as it is taught by management consultants and assorted gurus. ''Leadership,'' in this sense, is the pseudoscience of listening to employees or customers or voters and giving them back a mirror image of themselves. It is, as the historian James MacGregor Burns puts it, a ''dynamic, participatory, mutually empowering relation between leaders and followers,'' and those roles are easily confused. It was possible to love Clinton's charm in the belief that it was somehow ours. When he fell into a sex scandal, of course, voters felt betrayed. But they weren't really betrayed. What they were was embarrassed.
        Bush is another president we deserve. He, too, is often accused of betraying Americans -- by campaigning as a humble man and governing as something else. But this is also wrong. Bush has governed as he promised to -- with the kind of phony-demotic cocksureness that many people like in pickup-truck commercials and think of themselves as embodying. When he let it be known that he didn't ''do nuance,'' it was an invitation to say: ''Good. Neither do we.'' But this banty self-assurance -- our self-assurance -- appears not such a great trait when it leads you into a bloodbath in Iraq. The feeling circulating since the election is relief -- relief that this unflattering mirror is a bit closer to being taken away. It should not surprise us that this feeling is as strong among those who supported the president as among those who did not.
        THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 12-17-06 Christopher Caldwell is a contributing writer for the magazine and a senior editor at The Weekly Standard.
      