
        He was known for years as the Hammer, but Tom DeLay now prefers a new title. The Blogger.
        Six months after Mr. DeLay resigned from the House in the wake of a lobbying scandal, one month after the nation's voters seemed to dismantle what was left of his political machine on Capitol Hill, he has begun his comeback. Part of it can be found in the blogosphere.
        Mr. DeLay, the former House Republican majority leader who was nicknamed the Hammer by colleagues for his tough-minded legislative tactics, is suddenly everywhere again in Washington -- giving speeches, hitting the television talk shows and finishing his memoirs, which are due out next spring.
        The centerpiece for Mr. DeLay's return to the capital is his acerbic new Web site, tomdelay.com, which went online last week. It also serves as his newest fund-raising vehicle.
        He drew early attention to the blog with his prediction, made at a meeting with conservative activists to promote the Web site, that Hillary Rodham Clinton would be elected president in 2008 and would probably choose Senator Barack Obama of Illinois as her running mate. She would owe her victory, Mr. DeLay suggested, to liberal groups that had moved faster than their conservative counterparts to harness the power of the Internet.
        ''The blogosphere needs more conservatives,'' said Mr. DeLay, who sounded downright cheery in an interview this week as he described his plans to ''fight in a different arena.''
        He continued: ''My goal is to push the conservative cause and conservative thought. We need to use all media available to us.''
        ''There is life after Congress,'' said Mr. DeLay, who at 59 has not ruled out another run for office but has said it is unlikely. His future, he says, will not include a criminal conviction in his home state Texas, where he is under indictment on money-laundering charges, or in Washington, where two of his former aides have pleaded guilty to corruption charges involving the lobbyist Jack Abramoff.
        Federal prosecutors have never directly suggested that Mr. DeLay was in their sights in the Abramoff investigation, though friends have said Mr. Abramoff's guilty plea last January prompted Mr. DeLay's resignation from Congress. He stepped down in June.
        There is no trial date in the Texas case, which is delayed while appeals courts sort out legal challenges raised by prosecutors and by lawyers for Mr. DeLay and co-defendants, who were accused of violating the state's ban on the use of corporate money in races for the Texas Legislature. Mr. DeLay is not accused in the case of taking any money for himself.
        Whatever the outcome of the appeals, Mr. DeLay said, ''I will be fully exonerated.''
        Mr. DeLay said he was dividing his time between the Virginia suburbs outside Washington and Texas, where a family charity, the DeLay Foundation for Kids, is building a housing community outside Houston for abused and neglected children.
        He said that beyond the blogging, he might soon be announcing other career moves. ''We've got plans, but we're not ready to announce them,'' he said.
        Friends say that despite his friendship with Mr. Abramoff and other free-spending lobbyists, Mr. DeLay is not a rich man, and needs to stay employed, especially given the fees charged by his teams of criminal defense lawyers in Texas and Washington. Mr. DeLay said there was one career that he was not considering: lobbying.
        No one should imagine Mr. DeLay sitting in front of a computer monitor and keyboard, hunting and pecking as his Web site is updated each day. ''I'm not a very good typist,'' he said. ''That would take me forever.'' He readily acknowledged that he barely used the Internet, let alone a personal computer, before he got into this.
        ''I write my thoughts down in longhand,'' he explained of his blogging technique. ''Someone else puts it in.'' Whatever the process, he said, everything that finally appears on the Web site ''reads the way I say it.''
        Mr. DeLay said he decided to set up the Web site at the urging of his Internet-savvy daughter. ''She led me into the blogosphere,'' he said. ''It's a new world to me.
        But one important element of the Web site is not new to Mr. DeLay: fund-raising.
        Mr. DeLay was long one of the Republican Party's most successful fund-raisers, and his blog links to an application for paid membership to Mr. DeLay's new political organization, known as the Grassroots Action and Information Network.
        The group's promotional material bills it as a ''new force for change inside the American conservative movement, and a staunch opponent of secular progressive pressure groups and radical leftist agendas wherever they may be found in the United States.''
        For an annual fee of $52, members are promised ''insider information'' on Congress and ''updates on the ways of combating the plans of the radical left and their associates in the left-wing media elite.''
        A spokeswoman for Mr. DeLay, Shannon Flaherty, said the group was sorting hundreds of applications and would withhold approving anyone's membership until ''we've checked the references.'' She said the group was concerned that liberals would try to ''infiltrate'' the group.
        Mr. DeLay said he was ''disappointed but not surprised'' by the November elections, which ousted many of his closest allies in Congress. He said Republican Congressional leaders had failed to properly promote the accomplishments of Congress -- ''the media tried to portray it as doing nothing'' -- as Democrats stepped up their attacks.
        ''One of the major reasons the Republicans lost the last elections was communications, and that's why I'm looking to improve communications,'' he said, returning the conversation to his Web site. With the blog, he said, ''I'm trying to get people to think about what they really believe in, and call them to arms.''
        Mr. DeLay's Web site features attacks on the usual liberal targets: Jimmy Carter (''perhaps our nation's worst president''), the actor Sean Penn (''that political guru'' famous for his ''incoherent screeds'') and the blogger Arianna Huffington (''the long lost 4th Gabor sister'').
        But he has charity for others who might once have been targets, including Senator Tim Johnson, the South Dakota Democrat who underwent emergency brain surgery last week, endangering his party's hold on the Senate.
        ''Washington is a tough town, and I can personally attest to the fact that it can be a brutal and dehumanizing place,'' Mr. DeLay blogged last week. ''But I am also a fierce defender of the value that each person brings.''
      