
        The Federal Reserve left short-term interest rates untouched on Tuesday for the fourth consecutive time, warning that inflation remained a concern in a statement that offered little encouragement to those on Wall Street hoping the Fed will cut rates early next year.
        With only minor changes, the statement echoed the same message that central bankers have sounded since August, adding a nod to the deeper plunge in the housing market and other scattered signs of weakness in the economy that have emerged since its last meeting, in late October.
        But the thrust of the statement -- that the risk of higher inflation is still the biggest threat to the economy -- was unchanged.
        The decision by the 11 voting members of the Fed's policy committee to leave its benchmark interest rate at 5.25 percent was not unanimous. Jeffrey M. Lacker, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, who has dissented each time since the central bank stopped raising rates in August, voted for a quarter-point increase.
        Stocks recovered some of their losses from earlier in the day after the decision was announced around 2:15 p.m., but still closed slightly lower for the day.
        The price of 10-year Treasury notes rose while the yield fell, a sign that bond investors see the Fed as being successful in keeping inflation under control. Actions by traders in the Fed funds market suggest that investors think the Fed could cut rates in the next few months.
        But many economists said that the Fed is more likely to remain in a holding pattern unless it sees evidence that the economy weakens far more than it has so far. When it voted in August to pause a two-year campaign of raising rates, the Fed took a gamble that a slowing economy would eventually subdue inflation. Since then, prices have come down somewhat, but still not enough to put central bankers at ease.
        ''They're likely to be nervously on hold for a long time to come,'' said Ethan S. Harris, chief United States economist with Lehman Brothers.
        But other analysts argue that the slowing economy could still emerge as the issue that the Fed needs to watch most closely. The possibility that growth could cool more sharply than expected has led some economists to speculate that a rate cut could come as soon as next spring.
        The Fed acknowledged as much in its statement yesterday, noting that ''recent indicators have been mixed,'' and added the word ''substantial'' to describe the slowdown in housing.
        Still, most economists agreed that the Fed would need to see a big swing in crucial indicators like consumer prices and spending, and that a rate cut is not coming anytime soon.
        ''At the moment they're not really under any pressure,'' said Jan Hatzius, chief United States economist with Goldman Sachs. ''It just doesn't seem like there's anything forcing their hand in the direction of changing the bias away from inflation.''
        Inflation remains at a level that the Fed's chairman, Ben S. Bernanke, said recently was ''uncomfortably high.'' While lower gasoline prices have taken pressure off of prices over all, a tight labor market and rising wages threaten to keep inflation at the high end of the Fed's 1 to 2 percent comfort zone.
        Though the Labor Department said last week that the national unemployment rate rose slightly in November, to 4.5 percent, from a five-year low of 4.4 percent in October, payrolls outside the farming sector grew by a somewhat-better-than-expected 132,000 jobs, a sign that the demand for workers remains steady.
        ''There's certainly nothing on the unemployment front that gets them more relaxed about inflationary pressures,'' said Dean Maki, chief United States economist with Barclays Capital.
        Some economists, though, warned that the Fed was exaggerating the threat from inflation, and in doing so was taking a risk that it would squelch growth too much.
        ''The Fed is perhaps excessively concerned with inflation,'' said Kevin A. Hassett, director of economic policy studies at the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative policy group. ''The data are soft enough that there's beginning to be pressure on the Fed to ease. If the Fed stubbornly refuses to ease, then the data may get more negative than anyone wants.''
        The economy has already slowed in recent months, to an annual growth rate of 2.2 percent in the third quarter and 2.6 percent in the second, compared with a robust 5.6 percent rate in the first three months of the year. Most economists expect the modest pace to continue in the final three months of the year as well.
        Some economists suggested the stronger language the Fed used to describe the deterioration in housing was meant to give it some room to transition into a softer statement after its next meeting on Jan. 31.
        ''That would set the stage for the first of a series of funds rate cuts,'' Stuart Hoffman, chief economist with PNC Financial, wrote in a research report. Mr. Hoffman said that he expected a rate cut to occur in the second half of next year.
      