
        At 59, Thelma Rollins had just completed another step on what her mind and spirit said was her road to a new and better life. But then her body decreed that the road had reached a dead end, at least a temporary one.
        In August, Ms. Rollins recounted last month in her East Harlem apartment, she successfully completed a one-year probationary period as a part-time traffic checker with New York City Transit. Traffic checkers collect information on ridership patterns on the city's subway and bus routes. Standing on subway platforms and at bus stops, they count the number of passengers getting on and off; riding routes, they tally the number of passengers.
        Completing probation did not mean that Ms. Rollins would immediately get a full-time job at the agency. Rather, it meant she could keep working as a part-time traffic checker, averaging $190 in take-home pay for up to 25 hours of work each week.
        But getting through the probationary period was important, Ms. Rollins said, because it provided ''a foot in the door,'' a position from which she could readily apply for the variety of full-time jobs that open at the agency. Such a job would permit her to escape the poverty-level existence in which she had long struggled.
        Ms. Rollins raised four children, who are now 19 to 26, mostly as a single parent whose income came from welfare and other public assistance programs and from low-wage jobs like work as a security guard.
        In the late 1990s she set out on a middle-age quest for a better life; the probationary stint as a traffic checker was the latest stage. Earlier steps involved earning a high school equivalency diploma -- she had dropped out of her Bronx high school -- and, in 2004, receiving a bachelor's degree earned over six years at a Manhattan extension center of Mercy College, whose main campus is in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
        Her ultimate hope at New York City Transit, she said, was a personnel job that would make use of her college major in human behavioral counseling.
        But then her hopes were subverted by her body. In late August, barely a week after her probation period ended, she suffered a ruptured cerebral artery. She was hospitalized for nearly two months and underwent brain surgery.
        ''The nurses said I was unconscious for two weeks,'' she said.
        In fact, in an earlier warning that her body was no longer ''healthy as a rock,'' she had a mild heart attack two weeks before the probationary stint ended, she said. She was released from the hospital two days later and returned to work a week after the attack, she said.
        There was no such speedy comeback after the cerebral hemorrhage. Ms. Rollins said the transit agency had put her on an unpaid leave and told her she could return if she passed a physical examination within the next year. She worries, though, that she may not recover sufficiently to work again, there or elsewhere.
        ''I'm tired and I'm slow, and in pain constantly,'' she said. She is also depressed, she added, at the prospect of remaining mired in the financial deprivation she has tried to escape.
        Ms. Rollins raised her children in the three-bedroom apartment where she lives today, in a privately owned high-rise where a federal subsidy pays most of the rent for each tenant.
        Two of her children live with her. Her youngest, her 19-year-old son, postponed starting college when she suffered her cerebral attack, she said. She and his father were divorced 17 years ago, and she has not remarried.
        Her 25-year-old daughter, after serving in the Army, moved back in with her two small children before Ms. Rollins became ill.
        Another cause of her fatigue, Ms. Rollins said, is her tangle with the city's welfare program, her second this year.
        In the first instance, the program recalculated its contribution toward the $395 portion of her rent not covered by the federal subsidy. This led to confusion over the amount she was obligated to pay and to a rent-arrears lawsuit against her by the landlord, according to an organization that aided her, Lenox Hill Neighborhood House.
        Lenox Hill is a member of the Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies, one of seven agencies supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. Lenox Hill used $576 from the Neediest Cases Fund to pay the arrears. ''She was a victim of confusion caused by bureaucratic decisions,'' said Carolyn Silver, Lenox Hill's director of legal advocacy and organizing.
        In the current situation, Lenox Hill is helping Ms. Rollins seek reinstatement to the welfare program, which Ms. Silver said closed her case after she failed to attend an eligibility-review session in October. Ms. Rollins said notice of the meeting had been mailed to her home while she was hospitalized and she did not see it until she returned home.
        The closing of the case threatens a loss of $186 a month in food stamps and disqualification for future cash benefits and rent aid that she now again needs because she cannot work, Ms. Silver said.
        Ms. Rollins said, ''There's always a wall I have to get over.''
        HOW TO HELP
        Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
        BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street  Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217
        CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street  Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201
        CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue  New York, N.Y. 10022
        CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22nd Street  New York, N.Y. 10010
        COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22nd Street  New York, N.Y. 10010
        FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South  New York, N.Y. 10010
        UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station  P.O. Box 4100  New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
        Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of NYCharities.org, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
        No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
        The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
        Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
        To delay may mean to forget.
        Previously recorded: $2,925,418.99  Recorded Tuesday: 24,642.50  Total: $2,950,061.49  Last year to date: $3,079,742.71
      