
        Q I have received two letters from my condo management company about complaints from the neighbor downstairs and have been instructed to put carpeting in 80 percent of my apartment. Do area rugs count toward the 80 percent requirement?
        A ''I know of no law or court decision that would make a distinction between carpeting and an area rug,'' said Eric Kahan, a Manhattan real estate lawyer. ''And if you think about it, that makes sense. You could have a really expensive area rug with thick padding under it, or you could have really cheap carpeting with thin padding. In my opinion, as far as complying with the condo's 80 percent rule, area rugs and carpets are the same thing.''
        Co-op Sublet Fees: Who Has to Pay?
        Q I have been a shareholder in a co-op in Chelsea for almost 21 years. This co-op has always allowed subleasing, but now the board has approved a fee of $150 a month for shareholders who sublease their apartments. I bought my apartment from the original sponsor in 1986 and have never lived in it. Are there any rules for picking such an arbitrary fee, and do I have any legal recourse?
        A ''Sublet fees have been upheld by the courts where the proprietary lease includes a provision that board consent to the sublease is required and that the board may set conditions for its consent,'' said Howard Schechter, a Manhattan co-op lawyer. ''So if the writer's lease contains such language, a $150 per month fee would likely be upheld.''
        But he noted that the writer bought the apartment from the original sponsor and never lived in it. Under the typical language in proprietary leases, if the writer purchased his apartment from the sponsor as a ''holder of unsold shares'' -- basically, as an investor -- he would be exempt from obtaining consent or paying fees in connection with a sublet.
        A recent Court of Appeals case held that whether a particular shareholder is entitled to ''holder of unsold shares'' status will depend largely on the language of the proprietary lease.
        80-20 Income Rule Remains in Effect
        Q When my co-op was formed in 1985, Internal Revenue Service rules allowed only 20 percent of the co-op's income to come from commercial sources. What is the current commercial-income allowance?
        A Martin B. Miller, a Manhattan tax lawyer, said that the rule referred to by the letter writer is Section 216 of the Internal Revenue Code. Under that provision, he said, a co-op corporation cannot get more than 20 percent of its gross income from sources other than its tenant-shareholders.
        ''This is commonly referred to as the 80-20 rule,'' Mr. Miller said.
        He explained that when a co-op complies with Section 216, it qualifies as a ''cooperative housing corporation,'' and its tenant-shareholders get tax benefits similar to those enjoyed by other homeowners.
        Among those benefits are the right to deduct interest on mortgages, to deduct the unit owner's share of the building's property taxes and mortgage interest, and to exclude up to $500,000 in capital gains on the sale of an apartment used as a principal residence.
        ''Congress gave special tax benefits to shareholders in housing cooperatives because it viewed them essentially as a group of homeowners sharing their costs,'' Mr. Miller said. ''And having too much 'outside' income like commercial rent is inconsistent with that view.''
        JAY ROMANO
        Q & A
      