
        The Trocks are back, and none too soon. More formally known as LES BALLETS TROCKADERO DE MONTE CARLO, the company moves into the Joyce Theater on Tuesday for a three-week season featuring a production of ''Gaite Parisienne'' that will probably have Leonide Massine, its creator, dancing in his grave. Also new is Robert LaFosse's restaging of ''La Cage,'' a parable of love and death in the insect world that was already fairly silly in the Jerome Robbins original. The Trocks' knowledge of classical ballet draws informed and curious balletomanes. But the company's appeal is broader, extending to those in simple search of festive entertainment and to children who in earlier ages would have squealed at British pantomime. And buried in the joyous, goofy humor and expertise of the shows is a useful message: Dare to be fabulous and you're halfway there. 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, (212) 242-0800, joyce.org; $44.
        Abdel R. Salaam has marched to his own distinctive drumbeat for many years, a vibrant dancemaker who early on drew on Afro-American and Caribbean influences. His vivid, sprawling stories are told by the strong, individualistic dancers of Mr. Salaam's FORCES OF NATURE company. At Aaron Davis Hall (Friday and Saturday), and at the Apollo Theater (Dec. 29, with gospel music), the productions range from a thoughtful, history-crammed look at the relationship between Christianity and Islam to the life of the voodoo goddess Marie Laveau. Aaron Davis Hall, City College, 135th Street and Convent Avenue, Hamilton Heights, (212) 650-7100, harlemstage.org; $25, $35 and $45.
        SALLY HESS, one of the most luminous and mysterious of New York's modern-dance choreographers and performers, makes a rare stage appearance on Tuesday in the ''CROSSING BOUNDARIES'' series at Dixon Place. The roster of artists, chosen by Marcia Monroe, also includes Amos Pinhasi, Marija Krtolica, the Roosters and Moeno Wakamatsu, an architect turned choreographer. 258 Bowery, between Houston and Prince Streets, Lower East Side, (212) 219-0736, dixonplace.org; $12, $10 for students.
      