
        The temptation to toy with an audience must be fun for a performer, and Ton Koopman tried his hand at it on Tuesday evening at Zankel Hall. Having visited the hall last week with his Amsterdam Baroque Orchestra to play a program with a Christmas theme, Mr. Koopman returned with members of his group for an entirely secular chamber music program. It seemed straightforward enough. Bach's ''Musical Offering'' was on the first half, and his ''Coffee'' Cantata was offered after the intermission.
        But Mr. Koopman divided the ''Musical Offering'' into three sections. After the Ricercari and canons, played by various combinations of the group's two violinists, violist and flutist, with cello and harpsichord continuo, Mr. Koopman and company precipitously left the stage, so although the lights weren't turned on listeners who thought the intermission had arrived began to stream out, settling down only when Mr. Koopman returned with Catherine Manson, the violinist; Wilbert Hazelzet, the flutist; and Jonathan Manson, the cellist, to play the work's Trio. The players left again before the closing Canon Perpetuus, this time for so long that when the full ensemble, without Mr. Koopman, returned to play the final canon, they had to wait for people to run back to their seats.
        The ''Coffee'' Cantata offered less opportunity for mischief, although its performance began with the tenor, Otto Bouwknegt, running down the aisle, in street clothes, shouting ''Stop tuning!'' before taking up the recitative that opens the work. Beyond that, the work was semi-staged to the extent that the soprano, Bettina Pahn, and the bass, Klaus Mertens, walked around the stage, with Ms. Pahn sometimes sipping coffee from a paper cup. (How inauthentic.)
        The cantata had the livelier performance, with the singers projecting their texts clearly and with at least a hint of comic timing, and the ensemble providing solid, if thin-textured support. The ''Musical Offering'' was given a duller reading. Mr. Koopman's tempos, both in the ensemble pieces and in his solo harpsichord reading of the opening Ricercare, were metronomic and inflexible, a problem one doesn't normally associate with his work. It wasn't until the Trio that the performance showed signs of life.
        The players not already mentioned were David Rabinovich, violinist; Jane Rogers, violist; and Michele Zeoli, who played gamba in the closing canon of the ''Musical Offering'' and bass in the cantata.
        MUSIC REVIEW
      