
        As fast as the race car emblazoned on his backpack, Alberto Lopez, 6, dashed up the three flights of stairs. His autistic brother, Jose, 8, took a good while longer, jerking back between forward and reverse, prodded along by his mother, Peggy Lopez.
        At the door of their one-bedroom apartment in Yonkers, north of New York City, Ms. Lopez flipped and twisted the locks and latches on her door on this recent afternoon, using a key tethered to a reel clipped to her belt loop to unlock the final deadbolt lock. ''I sleep with this key,'' Ms. Lopez said, dangling it from her fingers and looking at Jose.
        Last year, the boy undid all the latches and locks and ran outside and down the middle of the street. Still not toilet-trained, he was wearing only a diaper. A fire truck, perhaps returning from a call, happened to be passing by, and firefighters chased the boy down. They soon found a frantic Ms. Lopez running their way.
        On this afternoon, once Ms. Lopez and the boys were inside the apartment, Jose stayed at the door and began wildly flipping the latches back and forth. Above the clicking and clacking sounds, he screamed, ''Iwannawannago!'' Then he began running around the apartment, still yelling, ''Iwannawannago! Iwannawannago.''
        Many people tell Ms. Lopez what a big job she has caring for Jose, but she says, ''I am used to it.''
        ''I just keep hoping he gets better,'' she added, ''but it's O.K. if he stays like this.''
        His brother does not seem to mind at all. While Jose screamed and ran, Alberto plopped down on the linoleum living room floor and turned on the television to a deafening volume to watch SpongeBob SquarePants.
        Jose's autism was diagnosed when he was 2. Autism is a brain disorder that can have symptoms mild enough to allow children to remain in regular classrooms or severe enough to require institutionalization.
        In Jose's case, the disorder traps him into a world of his own peculiarities. Tags on his shirts and soap on his skin irritate him. Besides the door latches, he is obsessed with music, especially that of the hip-shaking singer Shakira. Mention her, and Jose's mantra changes from ''Iwannawannago!'' to ''Sha-sha-kra!''
        Jose is prone to frequent tantrums, and the apartment walls are bare because he has repeatedly torn the pictures down. All the dishes are plastic because he often throws them when it is time to eat.
        Amid the chaos, Ms. Lopez, 30, tries to impose a daily routine, an important step in dealing with an autistic child. The predawn ritual of getting him, with his brother, to the bus stops a block away requires planning and some trickery. It may begin by her running with him to the end of the block or giving him some sort of a snack to distract him until he is safely bound for Hawthorne Country Day School, a nonprofit school for children with disabilities a half-hour bus ride from the apartment.
        Alberto goes to another public school about 15 minutes away.
        After picking the boys up at the bus stops in the afternoon, she takes the same route home every day.
        Once locked in, the three of them usually remain cloistered until morning. ''I rarely leave the apartment,'' she said.
        Last year, a stretch of misfortune threatened to disrupt the bit of normalcy she has been able to provide Jose and Alberto.
        She was laid off as a bus monitor for a private school bus company in Yonkers, leaving her with only $600 in Supplemental Security Income for Jose and $107 a month in unemployment to get by. And, with expenses like $320 a month for the special, extra-large diapers for Jose, she was unable to come up with the $800 for rent.
        She had few places to turn. Her parents, immigrants from Peru, are dead. The boys' father was still jailed on a theft charge. Finally, she went to the State Department of Social Services and was put into contact with the Catholic Charities of Community Service of Yonkers.
        The agency is a subsidiary of Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of New York, one of seven agencies supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
        In September 2005, Ms. Lopez poured out her troubles to Michelle Molina, a Catholic Charities caseworker.
        ''I told her, 'I can't be on the streets,' '' Ms. Lopez said.
        Ms. Molina gave her $500 from the Neediest Cases fund to help pay the rent, and asked the Big Brothers and Big Sisters organization to pass along clothes, shoes and coats for the boys. She explained how Ms. Lopez could better use Medicaid, telling her, for example, that the agency would help pay for Jose's diapers.
        ''She basically was placed in a situation that was beyond control, she lost her job, and knew her unemployment was running out,'' Ms. Molina said.
        Ms. Lopez also was able to finish software training made available by the unemployment office. She put her new skills to use as an office clerk at a hospital in White Plains, but had to quit when her schedule changed to weekends, and she was unable to find someone capable of taking care of her sons for those days.
        ''I want to work,'' she said. ''Once I find a job, I want to be able to keep it.''
        As Ms. Lopez talked, Jose kept screaming and running around the apartment. She didn't seem to mind.
        HOW TO HELP
        Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
        BROOKLYN BUREAU OF  COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street  Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217
        CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE  OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street  Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201
        CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE  ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue  New York, N.Y. 10022
        CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22nd Street  New York, N.Y. 10010
        COMMUNITY SERVICE  SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22nd Street  New York, N.Y. 10010
        FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT  WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South  New York, N.Y. 10010
        UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station  P.O. Box 4100  New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
        No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
        Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of NYCharities.org, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
        The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
        Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
        To delay may mean to forget.
        Previously recorded: $2,962,012.49  Recorded: $90,560.79  Total: $3,052,573.28  Last year to date: $3,216,835.41
      