
        Lincoln's Sword  The Presidency and the Power of Words  By Douglas L. Wilson  Illustrated. 343 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $26.95.
        In a eulogy of his idol Henry Clay, Abraham Lincoln noted that Clay's eloquence ''did not consist, as many fine specimens of eloquence'' do, of an ''elegant arrangement of words and sentences; but rather of that deeply earnest and impassioned tone, and manner, which can proceed only from great sincerity and a thorough conviction, in the speaker of the justice and importance of his cause.'' This, he concluded, is what enabled Clay truly to touch ''the chords of human sympathy.''
        The same of course might be said of Lincoln himself: arguably the finest writer to ever hold the office of president, and one who used his eloquence -- most notably in the Gettyburg and Second Inaugural addresses -- profoundly to transform how Americans thought about their country and its ideals.
        In his new book, Douglas L. Wilson -- co-director of the Lincoln Studies Center at Knox College in Galesburg, Ill., and the author of ''Honor's Voice,'' a critically acclaimed study of the younger Lincoln -- looks at the role that writing played in Lincoln's presidency, focusing on the circumstances that shaped particular documents and the evolution of those documents through the president's meticulous process of revision.
        Reams of words have already been devoted to Lincoln's writing, and while ''Lincoln's Sword'' provides some glittering nuggets of insight, much of it retraces familiar ground. The volume remains indebted to the work of other scholars on this subject like James M. McPherson, Don E. Fehrenbacher and Jacques Barzun, and on the matter of Lincoln's two greatest speeches, it is eclipsed by two earlier works: Garry Wills's seminal 1992 book ''Lincoln at Gettysburg: The Words That Remade America,'' and Ronald C. White Jr.'s 2002 book ''Lincoln's Greatest Speech: The Second Inaugural.''
        The most engaging portions of this book deal with Lincoln's habits of composition and the central place that writing played in his life. Mr. Wilson suggests that for the president writing was a form of refuge, ''a place of intellectual retreat from the chaos and confusion of office where he could sort through conflicting options and order his thoughts with words.''
        He notes that Lincoln often scribbled down ideas on scraps of paper and that he was a skilled reviser of his own work. He observes that Lincoln's fondness for reading aloud honed his sensitivity to phrasing and cadence and rhythm, and that he had a penchant for dramatic images and the literary device of antithesis (''the balanced opposition of words or phrases'') that would implant themselves in readers' and listeners' minds.
        Finally he argues that Lincoln -- a man of many moods, from the melancholic to the playful, from the philosophical to the irreverent -- was a writer of enormous range: someone equally gifted at the comic and the elegiac, the vernacular and the magisterial, someone who could ''do conciliation as convincingly as he could do confrontation.'' Curiously, Mr. Wilson does not spend much time delving into the influence that Lincoln's favorite writings -- including Shakespeare's plays and the Bible -- had on his own work.
        ''The truth is that Lincoln's writing, while frequently given credit for its clarity, did not rate high by the prevailing standards of eloquence, which, like the architecture of the day, valued artifice and ornament,'' Mr. Wilson writes. ''Like his contemporaries Herman Melville, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Walt Whitman, Henry David Thoreau, and Emily Dickinson, Lincoln was effectively forging a new, distinctively American instrument. Less self-consciously than some of these, perhaps, but no less diligently, Lincoln was in his own way perfecting a prose that expressed a uniquely American way of apprehending and ordering experience. His all-consuming purpose was, of course, not literary, but political -- to find a way to reach a large and diverse American audience, and to persuade them to support the government in its efforts to put down the rebellion.''
        Like many Lincoln biographers Mr. Wilson emphasizes his capacity for growth and the transformation of this folksy politician from Illinois into the Savior of the Union. He points out that Lincoln's ascension to the White House was greeted with lots of skepticism -- many regarded him as a callow, unpolished politician, ill-prepared to grapple with a nation that was ''in imminent danger of dissolution'' -- and that those who knew that Lincoln insisted on doing his own writing ''were not favorably impressed,'' regarding it another ''example of how an inexperienced executive wasted his time doing what might better be delegated.''
        With the publication (in newspapers and pamphlets) of a series of public letters by Lincoln, however, ''there began to be some wider recognition that the president, even with his idiosyncrasies, was an effective writer.'' Lincoln himself ''eventually came to realize how effective he could be before the public in a literary medium,'' Mr. Wilson writes, and ''it seems certain that he began to see how it might play a larger role'' in shaping public opinion: ''By the time he came to write the Gettysburg Address, for example, he was attempting to help put the horrific carnage of the Civil War in a positive light, and at the same time to do it in a way that would have constructive implications for the future.''
        With that succinct address, Lincoln would forge what Mr. Wilson calls ''a galvanizing and durable expression'' of the war's purpose, ingraining in the nation's consciousness a new understanding of the affirmation of equality contained in the Declaration of Independence, just as with the Second Inaugural Address, delivered shortly before his assassination, he would produce a magnanimous sermon on the meaning of that destructive and bloody conflict and the road toward binding up the nation's wounds.
        BOOKS OF THE TIMES
        Correction:  December 22, 2006, Friday  A picture caption in some copies on Tuesday with the Books of The Times review, about ''Lincoln's Sword: The Presidency and the Power of Words,'' by Douglas L. Wilson, gave the incorrect location where Lincoln was shown speaking. It was Gettysburg, not Cooper Union.
      