
        But don't take Mike Mussina's word for it.
        The Yankee pitcher has gotten a lot of attention lately for claiming that metal bats are no more dangerous than wooden bats.
        Mussina made his comment even though he does not have to face the shots that come clanging off the aluminum bats used and endorsed by most college, high school and youth leagues. A few serious challenges are being made to metal bats, including a proposed bill in the New York City Council that would ban the bats from high school games.
        Before accepting Mussina's opinion, the fair-and-balanced thing would be to consult somebody who hates -- and fears -- metal bats.
        That would be Jack Curran, the venerable baseball and basketball coach at Archbishop Molloy High School in Queens, a dedicated bachelor uncle of scholastic sports for 48 years of coaching.
        ''Too many kids are getting hurt,'' Curran said recently.
        Curran pitched for St. John's University and the Brooklyn Dodgers' farm system until he hurt his arm one rainy night in Quebec City. He was pitching batting practice for Molloy until a few years ago, when he tore up his shoulder.
        Recently, he's been feeling better, but he's not sure he wants to go back to 60 feet 6 inches from the nuclear-age artillery in the hands of his players, even with the batting-practice screen in front of him.
        ''You're going to need a screen for games, if this keeps up,'' Curran said.
        Curran is not a tilter at windmills, a whistle-blower, a troublemaker. Because of his concerns, the Molloy athletic director, Mike McCleary, cast the only dissenting vote when the Catholic High School Athletic Association voted, 22-1, to continue using aluminum bats. Curran's information is highly anecdotal, but he is one of those sports lifers who knows what he knows.
        ''A few years ago, one of our pitchers was throwing B.P. from behind a screen when he got hit in the eye,'' Curran said. ''I thought he was going to lose the eye, but the doctor saved it. A week later, another kid over-followed through in his motion and the ball hit him in the back of the head. This fall, a left-hander got hit with the ball square in the back. I was worried about his heart stopping.''
        What with three scary incidents in a few years, Curran made up his mind that the ball is coming back faster than it ever did. Kids are bigger. Techniques are better. Everybody wants to be a slugger. And he's convinced the biggest change is the processed metal implement the kids are wielding.
        ''When you see a little skinny kid hitting the ball like a rocket, the ball goes over the left-field fence, you know something's wrong,'' Curran said.
        City Councilman James Oddo, a Republican from Staten Island, has been trying to ban metal bats for five years but was slowed down by resistance from bat manufacturers and youth leagues. Oddo has been compiling examples of young players being drilled from metal bats, including Steven Domalewski, a 12-year-old from Wayne, N.J., whose heart stopped after he was hit in the chest last summer. Several adults saved the boy's life with first aid.
        Oddo says he has the votes to get the bill passed by the City Council in January.
        ''Let's err on the side of the kids,'' Oddo said, adding that he fears youth baseball (and manufacturers, sponsors and television) have been seduced by ''an arms race of sorts'' involving children driving the ball over a distant fence. Massachusetts and New Jersey and other states are also looking into a ban.
        A study in 2002 by the Baum Research and Development of Traverse City, Mich., concluded that with all other factors the same, a ball coming off an aluminum bat registered at 94.86 miles an hour while a ball coming off a wooden bat registered 86.31.
        ''It's simple,'' said Steven Baum, an electrical engineer who has been producing wood-based bats since 1991. ''Metal outhits wood.''
        Proponents of aluminum bats argue that they save teams money, because unlike wooden bats they are not subject to random breakage. The average wooden bat costs less than $50 while most aluminum bats cost over $150, but critics like Curran insist the savings are not so great because aluminum bats lose their resiliency after a season or so.
        The vast majority of youth leagues, coaches and officials insist there is no statistical trend that injuries are rising in the age of metal bats. Mussina, who lives near Williamsport, Pa., the home of Little League, is a member of the league's international board of directors. He emerged as a willing spokesman for the use of aluminum bats when his statement was released recently.
        While more evidence is compiled, a ban might not be a bad idea, even if it would affect only New York public and parochial high schools. Sometimes it takes a few independent voices like James Oddo and Jack Curran to define an issue.
        ''Someday, somebody's going to get killed,'' Curran added. ''It will be like after a kid gets hit by a car at the corner. Then they put in a red light.''
        SPORTS OF THE TIMES E-mail: geovec@nytimes.com
      