
        First, brutal lawlessness on an American street brought loss and grief to Sandra Vallejo and her seven children, natives of Ecuador who live in Queens. Then, rigorous enforcement of American law brought additional pain.
        In the late 1990s, when the family was living in Guayaquil, Ecuador, Ms. Vallejo and her husband, Edgard Infante, decided that they and their children would have a better future in the United States, Ms. Vallejo, 43, recounted recently.
        Mr. Infante had retired from the Ecuadorean Navy, she said, and his pension and post-navy employment did not go far in supporting the large family. The children then ranged from preschoolers to teenagers.
        One relative of Mr. Infante's, who had already immigrated to the United States, sponsored him and his family for permanent settlement here. But given the family's financial situation, they could not all come at once, Ms. Vallejo said.
        So in 2002 her husband and the two eldest children traveled to New York, she said, and the other children came the next year. He and the children crammed into a two-bedroom basement apartment that he rented for $1,000 a month in Richmond Hill, Queens. To help pay for the family's move, Ms. Vallejo said, she went to Spain to find work.
        By 2005, she was ready to join her family. But in September of that year, as she was awaiting approval of her application for a visa to enter the United States, what was a fairly typical tale of an immigrant family's piecemeal relocation to America turned into a horror story.
        Her husband, who was 52, and one of his brothers, Johnny Infante, 41, who had immigrated earlier, were shot to death in Newark by a passenger who, the authorities said, had robbed them in the livery car that Johnny Infante drove for a living. Edgard Infante was riding with his brother because he had hoped to drive for the same company and was familiarizing himself with Newark's streets, family members said in news reports of the crime.
        After learning of the killings, Ms. Vallejo went to the United States Embassy in Madrid and requested a visa to travel immediately to the United States. Her request was denied, in a letter indicating she had not convinced American consular officials that she would leave the United States when the visa expired.
        But three months later, she was granted a humanitarian visa allowing her to come to the United States last December for one year. That visa was granted under a process called humanitarian parole, after an application to immigration authorities in Washington supported by Jon S. Corzine, then a United States senator from New Jersey, and Sharpe James, then Newark's mayor.
        But the humanitarian parole is scheduled to expire on Friday, and it is not clear what will happen if Ms. Vallejo's application to extend it fails, said Emiko Furuya-Cortes, the immigration lawyer who filed that application. She works for Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of New York, one of seven agencies supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
        ''I'm very afraid I'll receive a letter saying I'll have to leave,'' Ms. Vallejo said. ''The situation is very hard for me and the children.'' Moments before, she had wept as she told of the call about her husband's death. ''It was very hard to believe, because I just spoke to him a couple of days before.''
        Ms. Vallejo was interviewed at Catholic Charities in Manhattan, her Spanish translated by Ms. Furuya-Cortes and another employee there, Cecilia Garzon. Catholic Charities became involved in the case several months ago at the request of the office of Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, who is supporting the extension application, Ms. Furuya-Cortes said.
        Even more significant for the long term, the lawyer said, American consular officials in Ecuador have determined that with her husband's death, Ms. Vallejo lost her right to be permanently admitted to the United States on the basis of the approval given to Mr. Infante and his immediate family.
        Ms. Furuya-Cortes said that she would pursue a reversal of this position, but that the focus now was on an extension of the humanitarian parole, to avoid another separation between Ms. Vallejo and her children -- especially the four youngest.
        Those four -- Ligia, Ecuador, Lisbeth and Sandra Infante -- are 11 to 14. The older three -- Rina, Jennifer and Israel Infante -- are 21 to 24.
        Rina, who works part time and attends La Guardia Community College, and Jennifer and Israel, who work full time, struggle to support the family on their combined pay of about $600 a week, said Ms. Vallejo, who is not permitted to work under her humanitarian parole status.
        Things may get even tighter. Their landlord wants the apartment back, Ms. Furuya-Cortes said, and the family has found a more expensive one in the neighborhood. Catholic Charities recently used $450 from Neediest Cases to buy winter clothing for some of the family members.
        And, Ms. Vallejo says, she has another reason for wanting to stay here: to attend the trial, the date of which has yet to be set, of Carnell Davis, the man charged with killing her husband and brother-in-law.
        HOW TO HELP
        Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
        BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street  Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217
        CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street  Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201
        CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue  New York, N.Y. 10022
        CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22nd Street  New York, N.Y. 10010
        COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22nd Street  New York, N.Y. 10010
        FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South  New York, N.Y. 10010
        UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station  P.O. Box 4100  New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
        No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
        Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of NYCharities.org, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
        The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
        Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
        To delay may mean to forget.
        Previously recorded: $2,962,012.49  Recorded Thursday: $90,560.79  Total: $3,052,573.28  Last year to date: $3,216,835.41
      