
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Reversing Trend, Big Drop Is Seen in Breast Cancer'' (front page, Dec. 15):
        It is wonderful news that the incidence of breast cancer has fallen, but it appears that the main reason for the decrease may be that many more cases were due to the excessive use of hormone replacement therapy.
        It always seemed to me an incredible way for the pharmaceutical companies to make money to take a naturally occurring phase of life, turn it into a disease and then convince women that they should not only take drugs for relief of symptoms during that time period but that they should also continue to do so for the rest of their lives.
        Linda Schechet Tucker  Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.  Dec. 16, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Re ''A Big Drop in Breast Cancer'' (editorial, Dec. 16):
        You accept a relationship between a decrease in the rates of breast cancer and decreased use of hormones.
        The decreased incidence of breast cancer may reflect better technology and increased discovery in prior years, lessening the number of cancers found later. Lowered incidence might reflect less screening.
        The study showing that hormones cause breast cancer, heart attacks, strokes and blood clots may be applicable only to the participants who were much older than the usual candidates for hormone use.
        Breast cancer in hormone users has been reported to be less aggressive, possibly reflecting earlier discovery due to increase in size without increase in spread.
        The relation between hormones and breast cancer is more complex than you appreciate.
        Robert  C. Wallach, M.D.  New York, Dec. 16, 2006
        The writer is a professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the N.Y.U. Clinical Cancer Center.
        To the Editor:
        I am one of the droves of women who abandoned estrogen replacement therapy because of breast cancer scares and who had been on it for years because an overly enthusiastic doctor (my gynecologist) had championed its use and dismissed every concern I raised in response to reports I read about its dangers.
        I am also a scientist, blown away by the significance of the statistics: a 15 percent drop in estrogen-positive tumors!
        The reason I abandoned estrogen replacement therapy was the detection of a breast tumor (a large one) that was 90 percent estrogen-positive and that was no doubt rapidly growing on the estrogen I was feeding it.
        Perhaps I would have breast cancer even if I hadn't taken E.R.T., but most probably it wouldn't have spread to my lymph nodes and, in a few years, to my liver. Four years later, I'm lucky to be alive to read this astounding news.
        I applaud The Times for giving this story the attention it deserves. I only wish that the early evidence hadn't been played down by the medical establishment and the media, with the rare exception of writers like Jane E. Brody (''Hormone Replacement: Weighing Risks and Benefits,'' Science Times, Feb. 1, 2000).
        Perhaps this new astounding result will embolden the research establishment to study the possible cancer-causing effects of other drugs and substances we casually put in our bodies and in the process to save more lives.
        Margaret Fels  Princeton, N.J., Dec. 16, 2006
      