
        Situation. Marvin Lewis hates that word, as in ''We have a situation,'' a phrase Lewis, the coach of the Cincinnati Bengals, has heard in too many off-hours phone calls this year.
        ''That's when I say, 'Oh jeez, what did we do now?' '' Lewis said.
        The Bengals (8-5) have won four games in a row heading into Monday night's game against the Indianapolis Colts, and they lead the wild-card race in the American Football Conference. But eight Bengals have been arrested since the end of last season, a number at least as well known in league circles as Ocho Cinco, Chad Johnson's nickname.
        The charges have not stuck in all the cases, but the stigma has. In Cincinnati, some fans call the Bengals the Mean Machine, an homage to the jail-yard team of convicts in the movie ''The Longest Yard.'' A video called ''Marvin's Reindeer'' was posted on YouTube this week. It includes pictures of the eight, and a song to the tune of ''Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer'' asks, ''But who could have guessed, the latest Bengals arrest?''
        Last Friday, when Lewis, in his fourth season with the Bengals, brought his team together at the end of practice, his instructions were simple: ''Get your butts in bed.'' Only a few hours later, cornerback Deltha O'Neal became the answer to the song's question when he was arrested after he was stopped at a sobriety checkpoint.
        Publicly, Lewis has mostly defended his players, offering up explanations and support. Privately, according to Bengals players, his frustration has been obvious. He has yelled at the transgressors in front of their teammates, hoping that the embarrassment will sway them. He has lectured that they are putting others in danger. And he has deactivated some of them.
        But still it continues, the trickle of misbehavior picking up again after it was dormant for a while, just as the winning has in the last month after an uneven start.
        ''I don't care if you're awake at 12:30 a.m., but don't be going through a checkpoint at 12:30,'' Lewis said of O'Neal, who was deactivated for last Sunday's game against Oakland. ''He thought he was fine. But he wasn't. Don't think you're fine, Mr. Macho. You're not fine and you're wrong.''
        Lewis, one of the league's most respected defensive coaches, has had plenty of opportunity to vent his aggravation and hone his message. All eight players were acquired on his watch, some of them coming to the Bengals with baggage.
        Chris Henry, drafted in 2005, has been arrested four times, and he was suspended by the league for two games this season. He has pleaded guilty to two separate charges in two states: marijuana possession and carrying a concealed weapon.
        This year, the Bengals drafted Frostee Rucker and A. J. Nicholson, who have since been arrested. Linebacker Odell Thurman, a second-round draft pick in 2005 whose draft stock dropped because of questions about his behavior, was suspended for the first four games of the season for violation of the league's substance-abuse policy.
        His suspension was lengthened to the entire season after a September arrest for driving under the influence. Lewis was so furious that he told Thurman to stay away from the team and took away his locker.
        Lewis said he knew last January that Thurman was going to be suspended for at least part of the season, so Thurman was never part of his plans.
        ''Unfortunately, we couldn't just jettison him,'' he said. ''Fortunately, no one was injured. We knew at some point he was going to totally flame out.''
        In a way, the Bengals have been lucky. Of those in trouble, most were peripheral players.
        ''It's not Carson doing this stuff,'' said offensive tackle Willie Anderson, referring to quarterback Carson Palmer.
        Indeed, the core of the Bengals -- Palmer, Anderson and receivers Johnson and T. J. Houshmandzadeh -- is unblemished. That has allowed the Bengals to be largely unbothered by the strife.
        With Palmer healthy after off-season knee surgery, with some of the best receivers in the league, and with the defense feasting on recent opponents like Cleveland and Oakland, Cincinnati is one of the league's hottest teams.
        The tunnel vision of professional athletes often belies a locker-room brotherhood. The Chargers and the Bears have also had multiple player problems this season, and they share the league's best record.
        Lewis said the Bengals' core group had encouraged him to deactivate players who got in trouble. Houshmandzadeh said the only time he thought about off-field issues was when he was asked a question about it.
        Anderson said: ''There is only so much you can do. People say, 'Can't the older guys talk to the younger guys?' I can talk all day, but it's like a parent talking to a kid. At some point, you've got to concentrate on football. If you don't, everybody will say, 'That's the reason you lose.' ''
        While Lewis has been hailed as a miracle worker for steering what had been a laughable franchise toward championship dreams, the police blotter has blotted him, too. There are those around the league who wonder why Lewis has continued to take such significant personnel risks.
        ''Maybe Marvin was so concerned about getting good players that he wasn't thinking about character,'' the former Bengals quarterback Boomer Esiason said.
        But Esiason said he was in no position to judge the current Bengals. He was on a Bengals team that had a running back, Stanley Wilson, who was found on the floor of his hotel bathroom in a cocaine-induced stupor before Super Bowl XXIII.
        ''What can he do, unless he starts cutting his players?'' Esiason said.
        That is usually not practical because of the salary cap. Lewis criticized the news media for suggesting that players be cut immediately or that teams eliminate from draft consideration anybody with trouble in his past.
        Plenty of players reform themselves, Lewis said. Furthermore, he said, ''You'd have very few guys left to draft.''
        Lewis acknowledged that he was well aware that some of the players might be trouble when he took them on, but he bristled at the suggestion that he had traded character for victories.
        ''It's not a roll of the dice,'' he said. ''It's an investment that playing in the N.F.L. can help you, you will grow into a better person, or a responsible person because of the privilege to play here.''
        Lewis insisted that his thinking on personnel was changing. He was tired of receiving phone calls from colleagues asking if he was O.K. He no longer wanted to make decisions about who should be inactive based not on practice performance or injury, but on a rap sheet.
        And he has a boss to answer to -- the team's owner, Mike Brown, who on Monday got a call from Commissioner Roger Goodell offering the league's assistance, a pointed indicator that Goodell wants to see a change. Lewis had a suggestion for how the commissioner could help: take over the burden and suspend more players.
        ''What the league can do is say, 'You don't play,' '' Lewis said. ''It would get rid of all the gray. You wouldn't have the discrepancy of team to team. It would take it out of our hands. I think young guys coming out of college would understand that. It would nip it in the bud. He can help it. Just say, 'Guys that do this, this is what happens.' ''
        Of course, the players union may not like that solution. But that is not Lewis's problem. In the middle of a playoff run, he already has enough problems.
        PRO FOOTBALL
      