
        Who Dat, Indeed
        The catchphrase ''Who dat? Who dat? Who dat say dey gonna beat dem Saints?'' was begun by New Orleans fans in the late 1970s. But the term ''Who dat?'' was never more appropriate than Sunday night, when fullback Mike Karney, above, helped the Saints rout the Cowboys, 42-17.
        Karney, a blocking specialist, scored three touchdowns, two on receptions. Up to that game, he had:
        Handled the ball 14 times this season as a runner or receiver, producing 53 yards.
        Never scored an N.F.L. touchdown, in three seasons in the league.
        Scored only one touchdown since high school, in his sophomore season at Arizona State.
        Had an ownership rate in Yahoo fantasy leagues of 0.00.
        Been mistaken for John Carney, the Saints' place-kicker, who converted six extra points Sunday.
        Reveled in his anonymity. ''I'm sure people didn't even know who I was,'' Karney told reporters. ''I'm sure people were wondering if they got someone off the street or something.''
        Hester in a Hurry
        The top five active leaders in career receiving touchdowns are Marvin Harrison, Terrell Owens, Randy Moss, Isaac Bruce and Joey Galloway. Of that group, only Owens has managed to score more touchdowns this season than the Bears cornerback and return specialist Devin Hester, who scored his fifth and sixth touchdowns of the season on two kickoff returns Monday night.
        Hester, a rookie who has already broken the record for special-teams touchdowns in a season, is new to the scoring business. The six touchdowns equaled his output during his three-year college career at Miami.
        Member Minus Privileges
        Ohio State's Troy Smith joined an exclusive club Saturday, but he may want to drop his membership: Heisman Trophy-winning quarterbacks who did not play at U.S.C.
        Carson Palmer (2002 Heisman winner) is on his way to a successful career, and his fellow Trojan Matt Leinart (2004) seems to be on the right path. But the Big 12 quarterbacks Jason White (Oklahoma, 2003) and Eric Crouch (Nebraska, 2001) have not played a down in the N.F.L.
        Neither did Charlie Ward (Florida State, 1993). Three other Heisman-winning quarterbacks from Florida colleges struggled: Chris Weinke (Florida State, 2000), Danny Wuerffel (Florida, 1996) and Gino Torretta (Miami, 1992). Weinke has taken being part of an exclusive club to another level, losing his 16th straight game as a starter Sunday against the Giants.
        Smith is already being criticized by draft experts as being too short, 6 feet 1 inch, to play in the N.F.L, a label Doug Flutie (1984) and Ty Detmer (1990) struggled to shake their whole careers.
        The only Heisman winner considered to have had an elite career as an N.F.L. quarterback was Roger Staubach (1963). Jim Plunkett (1970) was the only other player to win the Heisman and the Super Bowl as a quarterback, but he is not in the Hall of Fame.
        Buccaneer Bust
        The Buccaneers (3-10) were eliminated from playoff contention after a 17-6 loss to the Falcons on Sunday. Tampa Bay has lost six of its past seven, is 0-6 in its division and has not scored a touchdown in 11 quarters.
        Coach Jon Gruden was widely acclaimed as an offensive genius when he arrived from the Raiders in 2002. But the Buccaneers' offense fared better under Gruden's predecessor, the supposedly defensive-minded Tony Dungy.
        Under Gruden, the Buccaneers have never finished in the top half of the league in scoring, including the season Gruden led them to the Super Bowl.
        Dungy had two teams finish in the top half, including in 2000, when Shaun King was the quarterback of the league's seventh-ranked offense. Gruden, who has two years left on his contract, is 26-35 since 2002, his Super Bowl season. He told The Associated Press, ''Right now it's a cold, dark place, and you've got to keep your fist rolled up and live through these times and you've got to be a survivor.''
        Brees on Pace for 5,000
        The Saints (9-4) had 536 total yards in their victory against the Cowboys, the most by a visiting team at Texas Stadium. Drew Brees became the first quarterback to pass for 4,000 yards this season when he had 384 against Dallas.
        Dan Marino is the only player in league history to pass for 5,000 in a season (he had 5,084 in 1984). Brees needs to average 322.3 yards passing in the Saints' final three games to reach the 5,000-yard milestone.
        Running and Running
        The Jaguars rushed for 251 yards in the first half, and 375 over all, in a 44-17 victory against the Colts on Sunday. The total is tied for second best in N.F.L. history since the 1970 merger, but forgive Fred Taylor, above, if he was not surprised.
        When several Jaguars players took part in an N.F.L. video game tournament earlier this season, Taylor played as the Colts. He lost in the first round, giving up 200 yards rushing.
        ''They couldn't stop the run then, either,'' Taylor said.
        Maurice jones-Drew (166 yards) and Taylor (131) became the second pair of teammates in the past 30 seasons to each gain at least 130 yards rushing in the same game. Marshall Faulk (183) and Trung Canidate (145) did it for the Rams against the Panthers in 2001.
        Please Go, Brett
        Fans in Green Bay may find it tough to imagine football without Brett Favre, but fans in San Francisco are looking forward to it.
        Favre led the Packers to a 30-19 victory in San Francisco on Sunday, his 11th victory in 12 career games against the 49ers. He has thrown at least one touchdown pass in each of those games, but unfortunately for the 49ers, he felt so good about his most recent performance that he said, ''It makes you go home and say, 'Man, I could do this for a while.' ''
        Extra Points
        You have seen the last of suits on the sidelines this season. Jack Del Rio of the Jaguars and Mike Nolan of the 49ers had permission to wear them for two games. Del Rio, whose team stunned the Colts on Sunday, was 2-0 in his Sunday best; Nolan, whose team lost to the Packers, was 1-1.  Seattle, which had 29 rushing touchdowns last season thanks to Shaun Alexander's 27, has 4 this season, partly because of Alexander's foot injury. Seattle is tied with Tampa Bay for the league's fewest.  The rookie quarterbacks Matt Leinart of the Cardinals and Vince Young of the Titans are 7-1 in the past four weeks.  The Lions (2-11) have lost at least 10 games in six straight seasons.
        PRO FOOTBALL
      