
        EVERYDAY LIFE
        By Lydie Salvayre.
        Translated by Jane Kuntz.
        119 pp. Dalkey Archive Press. Paper, $12.50.
        There's one in every office: the creepy co-worker whose furtive presence and bizarre tics are the staples of water-cooler gossip. Now picture yourself sharing an airless room with this creature. Your desks are just a few feet apart. When she's not compulsively organizing her pencil tray, she's telegraphing waves of hostility in your direction. You have no idea why. But then you discover her diary. And you become very, very scared.
        This could well describe the experience of reading Lydie Salvayre's new novel, ''Everyday Life.'' A paranoid monologue in the voice of Suzanne, a middle-aged secretary at a Parisian advertising agency, the book goes from mildly amusing to chilling in 119 delectable pages. What throws Suzanne into such a tizzy is the arrival of a new secretary.
        This immediately hated figure enters the office, ''slowly and massively,'' Suzanne tells us, ''one buttock after the other moving forward, an unstoppable machine. I watch her settle in, taking up a vast amount of space in my tiny office. I feel myself shrinking. I think that I must do something. I don't move. All my senses are heightened. I catch myself watching her the way animals eye each other. I'm paying more attention to how she moves and yawns than to her manner of speaking.''
        Fearful the nameless new secretary will usurp her position in the company hierarchy, Suzanne sets about making the poor woman's 9 to 5 as pleasant as an Aeron chair lined with thumbtacks. Part of her resentment is understandable. She's had an office to herself for 32 years, and now here comes this intruder, reeking of vetiver perfume, chomping her gum and generally disturbing Suzanne's tomb of a workspace.
        Suzanne's treatment of her co-worker vacillates between coolness and feigned enthusiasm. The new secretary tries to befriend her in the usual fashion -- showing pictures of her son (''the child is hideous,'' Suzanne thinks), talking up her favorite novelist (deemed ''saccharine, inane, arrogant'') and dissing the boss (''outrageous'').
        There's ''a connection between the pain in my chest and the arrival of the new secretary,'' Suzanne tells her doctor. Later she confides: ''I would like to get stronger, to assert myself, to harm her, Doctor.''
        Forget the triple espresso. Spite is this woman's amphetamine. Her hatred is so passionate it's sexual. She dreams that the new secretary -- ''dressed in a man's pinstriped suit'' -- grabs her hair and kisses her ''slowly, exquisitely on the lips.''
        Even when Suzanne is convalescing in a hospital after shattering her ankle, she can't escape her nemesis. ''She controls me from within, controls my nerves and my blood and keeps me prisoner inside myself. To struggle against her further would amount to waging war against my own life.''
        Salvayre, who has a degree in psychiatry, pulls off the tricky feat of making the reader empathize equally with tormentor and tormentee. You even start wondering if Suzanne's paranoia is justified. Perhaps the new secretary -- younger, bustier, computer-literate -- is being groomed as her replacement.
        You could read ''Everyday Life,'' which has been lucidly translated by Jane Kuntz, as a commentary on today's cubicle culture, where employees are warehoused in such tight quarters that any hiring or firing throws the entire office ecosystem out of whack. We spend more time at our jobs, after all, than at any other place outside the home. Workplace dystopia is something we can all relate to.
        If the idea of living inside the head of a manic shrew seems tedious, this deliciously dark little desk drama is not for you. It will not transport you with gorgeous prose or imagery. It may, conversely, put you on edge. Especially the exquisite ending. That greasy-haired kook in tech support? He's worse than you think.
        Julia Scheeres's memoir, ''Jesus Land,'' was recently released in paperback. She is working on a novel.
      