
        FAST. Daring. Sleek. A quintessential Balanchine dancer. For most of Alexandra Ansanelli's nine-year career with the New York City Ballet, she treasured those frequent descriptions. But they were not what she wanted to hear after her debut with Britain's Royal Ballet in late October as Princess Aurora in ''The Sleeping Beauty.''
        ''I wanted to show myself and the ballet world that I was capable of making the transition from Balanchine to the classical style,'' she said the day after her debut. For Ms. Ansanelli, who is 25 and was scheduled to dance her last Aurora of the season Saturday, the role was her first major test at her new company, which -- in a surprise move -- she joined last year.
        With a tradition of dramatic characterization and measured, lyrical classicism, the Royal Ballet has stylistic priorities very different from the high-velocity, space-devouring approach at City Ballet. And ''The Sleeping Beauty'' is the biggest jewel in the Royal Ballet's crown: the ballet that cemented the reputation of the young company (then called the Sadler's Wells Ballet) when it was performed at the reopening of the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden after World War II, and the ballet that made Margot Fonteyn internationally famous after the company brought it to the Metropolitan Opera House in New York in 1949.
        Ms. Ansanelli's debut at a matinee on Oct. 28 provoked much interest among the company's followers, and her fans were visibly relieved after she flawlessly completed the notoriously difficult Rose Adagio in Act I, in which the young princess performs a series of unsupported balances as she is courted by four suitors. By the end of the performance, the consensus was that ''Miss A.,'' as one group of British fans call her on a ballet Web site, had done very well.
        The famously tart British critics agreed. ''When I saw that Alexandra Ansanelli was down to dance Aurora at Covent Garden, I wondered if she'd be up to it,'' Luke Jennings wrote in a review in The Observer. ''If there are doubters, she wins us over.'' The venerable Clement Crisp, who remembers Fonteyn in the role, was even more effusive. ''She brought a radiant assurance to the role,'' he wrote in The Financial Times.
        A perfectionist of the first order, Ms. Ansanelli was not convinced. ''I'm doing it too fast, aren't I?'' she asked during a post-premiere rehearsal with her partner, Rupert Pennefather. The balletmaster, Jonathan Cope, a former principal dancer with whom she has worked regularly over the last year, responded in a tone clearly intended to lower the intensity. ''Watch your upper body -- you don't want it to be too square -- but I don't think your tempi are a problem,'' he said. ''Quite honestly, I think we dance a little slowly here. You want to hold on to what makes you special.''
        Ms. Ansanelli has been a special kind of dancer ever since she rocketed onto the stage of the New York State Theater almost exactly a decade ago. A sprightly 16-year-old with a ready-made ballerina name, she had been a City Ballet apprentice for only a few weeks when she was suddenly cast in the solo role of Dewdrop in ''The Nutcracker.'' ''Ms. Ansanelli is that rare find, a dancer of nuance and originality,'' Anna Kisselgoff wrote in a review in The New York Times. ''She will be different and exciting.''
        Ms. Ansanelli seemed to be performing constantly in her first years with City Ballet, and she elicited a passionate following among balletomanes, who loved her unmitigated commitment to every moment onstage. She was promoted to soloist in 1998, danced in plum roles in the Balanchine and Robbins works that are the backbone of City Ballet's repertory and was regularly cast in new ballets by both Peter Martins, the company's balletmaster in chief, and Christopher Wheeldon, its resident choreographer. Ms. Ansanelli's one major setback came in 1999 when a foot injury sidelined her for more than a year, but she made a notable comeback at the start of 2001 with a beautifully delineated performance in Mr. Wheeldon's ''Polyphonia.'' She became a principal dancer in 2003.
        Just as her career seemed to have settled into a smooth pattern of accomplishment, she abruptly announced, toward the end of City Ballet's 2005 summer season in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., that she was leaving. Speculation was immediately rife, fueled by reports about the film ''Bringing Balanchine Back,'' about the company's 2003 visit to St. Petersburg, Russia. In this documentary, shown some months later at the Dance on Camera festival at Lincoln Center and scheduled to be shown on PBS on Dec. 31, Ms. Ansanelli is seen weathering heavy criticism from Mr. Martins as she rehearses for her debut in Balanchine's ''Serenade.'' Later, she is taken out of the ballet.
        ''That was certainly an uncomfortable event,'' Ms. Ansanelli said in an interview backstage at the Royal Opera House. ''But it was two years before I left. I'm not the kind of person to leave for those reasons.'' Instead, she said, her motivation was ''simply to try something different.''
        ''It sounds crazy,'' she said, but ''I just knew I had to take the first step, and that meant leaving City Ballet.''
        Ms. Ansanelli said she had no specific plans but knew she wanted to go to Europe and dance the 19th-century classics. At City Ballet, which mostly adheres to a more contemporary repertory, she had performed Aurora in Mr. Martins's version of ''The Sleeping Beauty,'' based on the original 1890 choreography by Marius Petipa. But ''I knew that stylistically I was wrong,'' she said. ''I've always been passionate about the classical works, and it was important to me as a ballerina to get that education.''
        A few companies, including La Scala in Milan, offered her positions, but when Monica Mason, the Royal Ballet's artistic director, asked to see her dance during a visit to New York, Ms. Ansanelli was thrilled. ''In my heart,'' she said, ''I was hoping to join another major company.'' Ms. Ansanelli auditioned in a rented studio for Ms. Mason, who immediately offered her a place as a first soloist, the rank just below principal at the Royal Ballet. ''She has such a natural musicality,'' Ms. Mason said. ''And different training and different styles intrigue me. The transition from City Ballet to the Royal Ballet is an unusual one, and we are all looking forward to seeing how it will work.''
        Since joining the Royal Ballet last December, Ms. Ansanelli has had the unfamiliar experiences of dancing in the corps and sharing a dressing room with 16 others. But even before Aurora, she has had her share of solo roles -- some already familiar to her, in ''Polyphonia'' and Balanchine's ''Stravinsky Violin Concerto,'' others less so, like the Lilac Fairy in ''The Sleeping Beauty'' and one of the three principal women in Frederick Ashton's ''Valse.'' And she has worked with luminaries like Antoinette Sibley, the ballerina who inherited Fonteyn's mantle at the Royal Ballet and remains a beacon of the English classical style.
        ''It was wonderful to coach Alexandra as Aurora because she really wanted to master the Petipa classicism,'' Ms. Sibley said in a telephone interview after Ms. Ansanelli's debut. ''It's not so much a technical thing. Balanchine is very fast; you hit the positions. Petipa is very rounded -- like a Roman column as opposed to a skyscraper. There is an awful lot of the upper body being used, too, inways that weren't natural for her. We also discussed interpretation; she likes to talk about things and examine them, and I think it shows onstage.''
        In many ways, Ms. Ansanelli is reminiscent of another City Ballet baby ballerina: Gelsey Kirkland, who shot to fame in the 1970s, left the company in which she had grown up to dance the classics, and was famous for her obsessive perfectionism before she retired from performance in 1986 -- after dancing Aurora with the Royal Ballet. But Ms. Ansanelli, while just as devoted to detail, seems to lack the self-destructive tendencies for which Ms. Kirkland was famous, perhaps because, in addition to pushing herself very hard, she also takes great pleasure in dancing.
        ''I think she is a great asset to the company,'' Mr. Cope said a few days before Ms. Ansanelli's second performance as Aurora last month. ''This is just the start of her feeling comfortable dancing classically. But I want to keep that Alexandra fire. She has such a natural theatricality; she really lives the performance. Of course, she is also just a little mad, which every great performer has to be.''
        DANCE
      