
        Longwood Towers, a brick apartment complex in Brookline, Mass., built in the 1920s, was being converted into condominiums last spring when the market slowed. Since some tenants had already moved out, the developer, the Radco Companies of Atlanta, appeared to have two options: leave the apartments empty and lose the revenue, or advertise for new tenants and risk turning off potential buyers.
        Radco chose another strategy. Through a management company, the developer leased 25 furnished apartments to Harvard University for short-term use by professors and researchers. Similarly, in 2002, Radco hired a corporate housing provider to find temporary tenants after it acquired a failed condominium project in Atlanta, the River West, in which three-quarters of the units were vacant.
        ''You don't want to send a mixed message to the marketplace that we're renting when we're not,'' Norman Radow, president of Radco, said. Enumerating the advantages of corporate housing, he said: ''There were no ads in the newspaper that apartments were for rent. There was no buzz in the marketplace, and you didn't have 10 people a day coming to look at apartments.''
        Corporate housing -- generally apartments leased to companies that furnish them, equip them with linens and dishes and rent them out for a month or more -- is mainly intended as an alternative to hotels for executives or employees either on temporary assignment or in the midst of relocating. But it can also be a boon for developers during a building's transition from rental to condominium or for condominium investors facing a sluggish market.
        ''We can work in almost any cycle,'' said H. Lee Curtis, the president of BridgeStreet Worldwide, a division of Interstate Hotels and Resorts, and one of four corporate housing providers with apartments in multiple locations. The other industry leaders are Oakwood Worldwide, which dwarfs its rivals with 18,000 units; Marriott ExecuStay, a division of the hotel company; and Equity Corporate Housing, a division of Equity Residential, the nation's largest apartment real estate investment trust. A relatively small and fragmented slice of the real estate industry, corporate housing is also offered by hundreds of local companies.
        Like the hotel industry, this sector was hard hit by the recession that began in 2001, but it ''is now getting back to pre-9/11 levels,'' Mr. Curtis said.
        Not surprisingly, corporate housing's performance is closely tied to economic growth, said Craig Leupold, an analyst at Green Street Advisors, a research company in Newport Beach, Calif., that focuses on real estate investment trusts. ''When the economy is adding jobs -- that's when business is best,'' he said.
        But Howard Ruby, the chief executive and founder of Oakwood Worldwide, said his business was growing because it was going after new customers like baby boomers seeking to visit grandchildren for a month at a time without imposing on their children. The private company, which last year sold 7,000 apartments to Archstone-Smith, an apartment REIT, and leased them back, now bills itself as a provider of ''temporary'' rather than ''corporate'' housing.
        In a recent study, the Highland Group, a consulting company for the lodging industry, counted nearly 60,000 units of corporate housing in 34 metropolitan areas, an increase of about 12 percent since 2004. In those areas, revenue for 2005 was close to $2 billion, up from about $1.53 billion during the recent recession, and the average stay was 82 days.
        Peggy Berg, Highland's president, said the number of corporate apartments throughout the country was not known because there were so many different providers. ''Sometimes a broker will have two or three apartments available,'' she said.
        With about 4,800 units, New York ranks third in inventory after the Washington-Baltimore and Los Angeles areas, according to the Highland report. A tight rental market has made it difficult for operators to find apartments, leading to higher rents, the providers say.
        ''Some landlords try to charge a premium,'' said Frank Laufer, the president of Alternative Business Accommodations, which has apartments in 20 buildings in the New York area.
        Rents in the New York area averaged $170 a night, compared with $100 nationwide, according to the Highland report. Manhattan prices can run much higher. At 1600 Broadway, a sleek new residential tower overlooking Times Square, Bridge-Street and its partner, a local company, Furnished Quarters, as well as Alternative Business Accommodations, offer one-bedroom condominiums for $225 and up a night. Since 2005, corporate apartments rented in New York for less than six months have also been subject to city hotel taxes.
        Given that New York hotel rates, even at those that specialize in long-term stays, exceed $300 a night, ''the benefits of a fully furnished apartment become very apparent,'' said Bill Hoffman, the president of Equity Corporate Housing.
        Unlike the owners of 1600 Broadway, most condominium associations in New York and some apartment building landlords, like Glenwood Management, prohibit leases with corporate housing providers, Mr. Laufer said. The Related Companies allows temporary use of its apartments but does not allow them to turn over more than twice a year, said David J. Wine, a vice chairman.
        The corporate housing industry is under scrutiny in New York because of reports that apartments intended for permanent housing are being rented to tourists. The city has received 200 complaints in the last few months, primarily in Manhattan, and is using undercover investigators to examine the extent of the practice, said John Feinblatt, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's criminal justice coordinator. The violators include individuals renting out their own apartments as well as condominium conversion sponsors and corporate housing providers, he said.
        ''This is a growing problem that doesn't follow one specific fact pattern,'' said Mr. Feinblatt, who declined to provide details. Though the 30-day minimum is not enshrined in city law, stays of that duration have traditionally been allowed, but Mr. Feinblatt would not say if this policy should continue. ''Thirty days is not any magical elixir,'' he said. The city is trying to find a way to balance a need for corporate housing with the safety and quality-of-life needs of permanent residents, he said.
        Last year, Swig Equities, the owner of the Sheffield, a rental building at 322 West 57th Street that was undergoing a conversion to condominiums, leased about 85 unoccupied apartments to Furnished Quarters, said Steven H. Brown, its president.
        Nancy Rovelli, the president of the tenants association, said in an e-mail message: ''For the tenants, life became a nightmare: hordes of tourists hellbent on having a good time in the Big Apple; late-night parties in the hallways; and a complete breakdown of security, as doormen could no longer distinguish who belonged in the building and who did not.''
        In September 2005, Swig was fined $800 by the city Environmental Control Board for violating its certificate of occupancy by allowing daily rentals through the Furnished Quarters Web site. But Mr. Brown said all the apartments were rented for 30 days or longer, though that may not have been clear to the permanent residents. ''We did not do hotel stays there,'' he said.
        Kent M. Swig, the president of Swig Equities, contended that Furnished Quarters had only 36 apartments in the building, and none were used for short stays. He said his company had paid the fine because it was cheaper than challenging the city in court.
        Mr. Brown said unscrupulous operators who treat apartments like hotel rooms were tarnishing his industry. ''There are people out there whose business is built solely on short stays, with tour buses pulling up and listings on Travelocity,'' he said. ''It's not what our business is.''
        Square Feet
      