
        BUY organic, destroy the rainforest,'' The Economist said last week, eliciting howls of protest from food-activist bloggers (economist.com).
        The magazine's look at ''ethical food'' questioned whether ''voting with your trolley'' (Yanks call it a shopping cart) can help save the world by encouraging organic products, fair-trade-labeled goods and locally grown produce. The sweeping conclusion was that it cannot.
        ''Fair trade'' is anything but, The Economist concluded. Fair trade products often carry a premium above market prices, part of which is returned to impoverished farmers. The problem here, the magazine said, is that artificially high prices work against the very problem such schemes are meant to solve: overproduction. Coffee prices have tanked in recent years because there's too much of it being produced. Higher prices encourage more production.
        The Economist seems to be on more slippery ground when it concludes that neither organic nor locally grown food helps the environment.
        Organic farming uses ''several times as much land as is currently cultivated,'' which is a net loss for the environment, the article states. If the world's farms all switched to organic production, there ''wouldn't be much room left for the rainforest.''
        ''Nonsense,'' wrote Parke Wilde, a food economist at Tufts University who writes the blog U.S. Food Policy. Mr. Wilde was less than convinced by the scant evidence the magazine offered for its conclusion that organic farming destroys rain forests (usfoodpolicy.blogspot.com).
        ''This is a recycled version of the argument the agro-business-funded Hudson Institute has been making for years,'' wrote Samuel Fromartz in the comments section of Gristmill, a blog about the environment (gristmill.grist.org).
        Mr. Fromartz, author of ''Organic Inc.,'' wrote that more-reliable studies show that organic farming is not as land-intensive as critics suggest, and that the article did not address several of the problems with conventional farming that organics are meant to help solve, like soil depletion.
        The Economist says it is up to politicians to solve the problems wrought by conventional farming -- by removing trade barriers and enacting carbon taxes, for example. But it does applaud the ethical food movement because it ''sends a signal'' that ''governments are not doing enough to preserve the environment, reform world trade or encourage development.''
        THE POWER OF HERESY -- In 2004, the development chief of Microsoft Windows, Jim Allchin, wrote in an e-mail message to the chief executive, Steven A. Ballmer, and the chairman, Bill Gates, that he would buy a Mac if he weren't working for Microsoft. ''In my view we've lost our way,'' he wrote, listing areas in which the company had ''lost sight'' of its customers' needs.
        The message was presented as evidence in the Iowa antitrust trial Comes v. Microsoft. Groklaw.net posted it last week.
        Mr. Allchin responded on his blog this week that the e-mail ''is nearly 3 years old, and I was being purposefully dramatic in order to drive home a point.''
        His aim was to spur the company to improve, he wrote, and improve it did: Windows new operating system, Vista, is ''better than any other OS we've ever built and far, far better than any other software available today'' (windowsvistablog.com/blogs).
        YOU GOT SERVED -- Pat Dori of Hackensack, N.J., said he spent five months trying to get Dell Computer to fix or replace his broken laptop. He called the company 19 times, he says, without satisfaction. So he decided to sue.
        But rather than serving the company at its headquarters in Round Rock, Tex., he delivered the court papers to a shopping-mall kiosk. The result: ''Quite unsurprisingly, no one from Dell turned up in court on the stipulated date,'' wrote Conrad Quilty-Harper on engadget, a personal technology blog (engadget.com).
        Mr. Dori thus won a $3,000 default judgment. Dell told The Newark Star-Ledger that the settlement was amicable but would not disclose details.
        Mr. Dori is ''our latest hero for sticking it to the man in such a crafty manner,'' Mr. Quilty-Harper wrote.
        DAN MITCHELL
        Complete links are at nytimes.com/business
        WHAT'S ONLINE E-mail: whatsonline@nytimes.com.
      