
        Patients visiting the Family Medical Center in the Bronx are being asked to say more than ''ahh'' these days.
        ''I've been asking a number of our patients to tell me who their all-time favorite Yankees are,'' said Dr. Emilio Biagiotti, 44, a lifelong Yankee fan who is in practice in Pelham Bay with two other doctors and fans: his wife, Wendy, and Joseph Bonanno.
        During the baseball playoffs in October, Biagiotti treated patients with Yankee fever by commissioning an outdoor mural that is 20 feet high and 100 feet long. It honors 17 Yankees from the 1920s to today.
        Many of those ''ahhs'' are now accompanied by ''oohs.''
        ''Our patients are so excited about it,'' Dr. Wendy Biagiotti said of the wall of fame. ''The Yankees are so much a part of the Bronx, and all of those players from all of those different eras appeal not only to our younger patients but to their parents and grandparents.''
        The mural, on the brick wall of the Family Medical Center offices on the corner of East Tremont and Harrington Avenues, was painted by two commercial artists, Jim Houba of Toms River, N.J., and Jim Nuzzo of Daytona Beach, Fla. Following doctor's orders in early October, they began working, one stroke at a time, to bring Biagiotti's Yankee dream team to life.
        ''The players on the mural are based more on popularity than statistical achievements,'' he said. ''These are the players who would probably make any Yankee fan's all-time list.''
        The centerpiece of the mural features the four players who are widely regarded as the greatest of all Yankees. Babe Ruth, who is wearing an early 1920s-style pinstriped cap, is flanked by Lou Gehrig and Joe DiMaggio. Next to DiMaggio is the man who replaced him in center field, Mickey Mantle.
        The rest of the mural includes Bill Dickey, Red Ruffing, Phil Rizzuto, Yogi Berra, Whitey Ford, Roger Maris, Thurman Munson, Ron Guidry, Reggie Jackson, Don Mattingly, Paul O'Neill, Mariano Rivera and Bernie Williams.
        ''It sounds like a pretty good lineup,'' Berra said through a spokesman at the Yogi Berra Museum and Learning Center in Little Falls, N.J. ''Nice they put me in, I guess.''
        O'Neill, who won four championships with the Yankees, was also flattered and said he looked forward to seeing it.
        ''This is another wonderful thing that's happened to me in New York,'' he said in an e-mail message. ''I am overwhelmed, humbled and honored to be included among the legendary Yankee players in the mural.''
        Biagiotti said that by opening day, Graig Nettles, Willie Randolph and Derek Jeter would be getting their fair share of latex paint.
        ''Nettles has to be there, with all of those great plays he made at third base to help us win two World Series back in the 1970s,'' Biagiotti said. ''Randolph was a great second baseman and a great coach for us, and now that he's managing across town, the mural gives Mets fans a little something to cheer about.''
        Nuzzo painted the Yankee Stadium facade, which frames the mural. Houba, who painted all of the players, said he had worked on it eight hours a day, two or three days a week, since Oct. 6. A Yankee fan himself and a friend of the Biagiottis, Houba is doing it for free.
        ''The positive feedback I've been getting from people who live in the area has been my reward,'' he said. ''I'm very happy about what I've done.''
        So are many of the patients and neighbors who walk past the mural every day.
        ''It's a really nice work of art that brightens up the whole neighborhood,'' said Mike Nielson, who lives in Pelham Bay. ''I stopped by and watched on the day that the artist was painting Mickey Mantle. It was a real treat.''
        If enough wall space remains after the next group of Yankees is painted, Biagiotti said he might include one or two more players who are ''on the fence.''
        Those include Tony Lazzeri, Goose Gossage, Catfish Hunter and Bucky Dent. Elston Howard, Bobby Murcer and Roy White are also on Biagiotti's depth chart, but he is not ruling out second opinions.
        ''Should a spot still remain, they all have a shot at filling in,'' said Biagiotti, sounding more like a general manager than a general practitioner. ''I'll throw it out for our patients to decide.''
        Anthony Artuso, who lives nearby in the Country Club section of the Bronx, said that as far as the players chosen for the mural, ''Dr. Biagiotti has it right -- except for one other player.''
        ''Sparky Lyle,'' he said. ''If Goose goes up, then Lyle has to be there.''
        CHEERING SECTION E-mail: cheers@nytimes.com
      