
        The Nets, who have struggled for much of the season, may have found a winning formula. For the second straight game, a dominant effort from Vince Carter and a mediocre opponent added up to a victory.
        After soundly defeating Memphis -- the worst team in the Western Conference -- behind 37 points from Carter, the Nets won their second straight Wednesday night with a 108-95 victory against the Milwaukee Bucks.
        Carter led the way with 36 points but shared the spotlight with Jason Kidd, who had his second straight triple-double, the 80th of his career. Kidd, third on the N.B.A. list for career triple-doubles, had 10 points, 10 rebounds and 10 assists.
        ''Vince was again Vince,'' Kidd said. ''He shot the 3, he made the right plays, he found the right guy.''
        The Nets (9-12) won despite not having Richard Jefferson for the second half. After scoring 7 points in the opening half, Jefferson sat out the final 24 minutes with a sore right ankle, which, he said, has been a recurring problem this season. In November, Jefferson missed five games with a sprained left ankle.
        ''I would have tried to suck it up through the game, but I was hurting the team more than I was helping them,'' he said. ''Not being able to go after loose balls, not helping on the glass, I knew it wasn't a time to suck it up, but to sit on the bench and let the other guys finish it off.''
        In line to win three straight for the first time this season, the Nets will face the Raptors (8-14) in Toronto on Friday. Jefferson said he was unsure whether he would play against Toronto.
        Carter did most things well against the Bucks. He made 12 of 23 field-goal attempts and had six rebounds and nine assists. Nenad Krstic was the second-leading scorer for the Nets with 13 points. Mikki Moore had 12 points off the bench.
        ''Without the production from the bench, we wouldn't have been able to win the game,'' Nets Coach Lawrence Frank said.
        The Nets contained Milwaukee's leading scorer, Michael Redd. Coming into the game averaging 28.9 points a game, Redd had only 9 points Wednesday. It was the first time he was held to single digits this season.
        ''Tonight, New Jersey was determined to lock me down and shut me down and they did a good job,'' Redd said. ''They had an extra body on me all night.''
        The Nets started last season 9-12 before winning 10 games in a row.
        ''We're not panicking,'' Kidd said. ''We'd all like to have a winning record, but we've been here before.''
        ''The big thing is for us to get better and I feel we're doing that, defensively and offensively,'' he said.
        Carter, the star in Monday's victory against Memphis when he had a franchise record nine 3-pointers, picked up where he left off. He made all four of his 3-pointers in the first quarter.
        ''Once I got going, that gave us a little spark and some energy,'' Carter said.
        But the Bucks (9-13) managed to hang around until midway through the fourth quarter. After Steve Blake hit a 3-pointer to cut Milwaukee's deficit to 2 points with 10 minutes 46 seconds to go, the Nets finally put together a spurt. Marcus Williams started it with a 3-pointer that ignited a 9-0 run that put the game away.
        PRO BASKETBALL
      