
        The Pittsburgh Steelers are a long shot to make the playoffs, but they will influence the postseason, even if it is from their sofas.
        The Steelers made a dramatic dash to the Super Bowl last season, winning their final four regular-season games and slipping into the last wild-card spot before winning three playoff games on the road. The lesson from that for this season's contenders is that momentum may be more important than location.
        The Indianapolis Colts know that better than almost any other team. They held the top seeding in the American Football Conference last season and the home-field advantage throughout the playoffs, but lost to the Steelers last January.
        Indianapolis had wrapped up home-field advantage so early in December that Coach Tony Dungy had the dubious luxury of resting his starters. By the time the Colts faced Pittsburgh in the divisional playoffs, they had not played a meaningful game in a month.
        That is why the Colts were so worried before their 34-16 victory over the Cincinnati Bengals on Monday night. They had already secured the A.F.C. South title, but had also lost two games in a row and three of four as their offense stalled and their run defense collapsed.
        The feeling throughout the N.F.L. was that Indianapolis had been eclipsed by the San Diego Chargers as the premier team in the A.F.C., and that its window of opportunity to win a Super Bowl had suddenly slammed shut.
        But with three safeties -- including the two starters -- on the bench with injuries, the Colts forged what may have been a defining game for their defense. They stopped a Bengals team that had won four games in a row, holding the Cincinnati running game to 133 yards and sacking Carson Palmer four times. The stoicism shown by Dungy after the consecutive losses had seemingly steadied the Colts.
        Afterward, Dungy said that while a first-round bye in the playoffs would be welcomed, he was more concerned with his team's execution and effort on the field. ''More than anything, it's how you're playing,'' he said. ''This was a big win for us.''
        The Colts (11-3) would secure a first-round bye, and the second seeding, if they beat the Houston Texans on Sunday and the Baltimore Ravens (11-3) lose to the Steelers.
        The bye would give the Colts' starting defensive players more time to recover from their injuries. Safety Bob Sanders, a linchpin of the run defense, has played just four games this season and has been unable to practice because of a painful knee injury.
        The Colts can only earn the top seeding and home-field advantage throughout the playoffs if the Chargers (12-2) lose their final two games, to Seattle and Arizona, and the Colts win their final two, against the Texans and the Miami Dolphins, and finish with a better record. If the teams finish with identical records, the Chargers will win the top seeding. If the Chargers win this weekend and the Ravens lose, the Chargers will wrap up home-field advantage.
        In early December, when the Colts were still undefeated, it appeared they might again clinch the home-field advantage throughout the playoffs. Dungy said at the time that he would be inclined to rest his starters as he had last season. He was saved from that decision, though, by the losses.
        ''Just like the Steelers did last year,'' Colts linebacker Rob Morris said. ''They got on a roll and we need to get on a roll now and be playing our best ball going into January.''
        The Bengals, despite losing to the Colts, are 8-6 and still in position to win a wild-card spot. This week, they play Denver (8-6), which is currently in the fifth spot. The losing team will likely suffer a crippling blow to its playoff chances.
        The Jacksonville Jaguars and the Jets, both 8-6, are still in contention for the final playoff spot but need help because of tie-breaker situations. Of those in contention, the Jets have the easiest remaining schedule, finishing the season against the Dolphins and the Oakland Raiders.
        In all, 24 teams are still alive, the second-highest number of teams in the running this late in the season since 1978, when the N.F.L. went to a 16-game schedule.
        The Colts, who have won four straight division titles, are not used to being part of the scrum. The Steelers, however, could tell them it is not all bad.
        PRO FOOTBALL
      