
        Of the 45 Sam Shepard plays that the Michael Chekhov Theater Company plans on producing in its ambitious yearlong festival, ''True West'' might be the most daunting challenge. Besides being performed in countless acting classes across the country, this classic sibling rivalry play has already had two brilliant New York productions in the last quarter-century -- three, if you count the 2000 Broadway version twice because Philip Seymour Hoffman and John C. Reilly alternated roles on different performances. The definitive production is of course the legendary 1982 revival starring then little-known actors Gary Sinise and John Malkovich. Who would possibly want to follow in these footsteps?
        This new perfectly pleasant version doesn't exactly reinvent the play, but it does try something new: understatement. Or at least it steers clear of overstatement, rarely indulging in the kind of overblown histrionics and endless stage business (how many things can an actor do with a golf club?) that has become something of a hallmark of the drama.
        Staged in a rigorously naturalistic style by Ann Bowen, the play moves briskly; the actors hit their marks but never pause to pound them into the floor. Even the design seems oddly restrained. The suburban kitchen, which is supposed to be destroyed by the end, is merely messy, closer to a teenager's room than a post-apocalyptic disaster area.
        Tom Pavey plays the juicy role of Lee, the coarse criminal from the desert who sneers at that ''sweet kinda' suburban silence.'' He's dressed in a dirty, ripped T-shirt, growls and slurps beer, but there is no menace in his performance.
        The focus of this ''True West'' belongs to the quieter brother, Peter Picard's Austin, the Ivy League-educated screenwriter who is in the process of selling a love story to a Hollywood producer. Mr. Picard's face seems frozen in a mask of exasperation, his eyes rolling and his lip curling into something resembling a question mark. After Lee persuades the Hollywood producer to buy his idea for a movie, the brothers switch places; Lee starts acting like an anxiety-ridden writer, and Austin turns to petty crime.
        ''True West'' is considered to be one of Mr. Shepard's more accessible, conventional plays, but it departs from the strictures of a well-made play into something much grander, more mythic. He tips you off to his intentions by constantly mocking the Hollywood obsession with the ''true-to-life'' story.
        This production never really grapples with the bizarre plot twists, the outrageously absurd humor and the heightened poetic language. Consequently it comes off as a smaller play, a domestic dispute with rigidly dichotomous themes. What you get is the realism without the magic.
        ''True West'' is at the Big Little Theater, 141 Ridge Street, near Houston Street, Lower East Side, through Jan 5.
        THEATER REVIEW
      