
        Thursday night games in the National Football League give coaches more to complain about and less time to prepare.
        Coaches are notorious for being creatures of habit. Week after week, they strictly adhere to the same schedule. They practice on certain days. They rest players on certain days. They meet the news media on certain days. They install the game plan on a certain day. Some coaches cherish their schedule almost as much as they cherish time of possession.
        But when the N.F.L. added a weekly Thursday night game to this year's late-season schedule, it added more midweek stress to the coaching profession.
        Mike Nolan experienced it for the first time this week, preparing his San Francisco 49ers for tonight's road game against the Seattle Seahawks.
        Nolan's comments about playing on Thursday echoed what most coaches who have dealt with it have said.
        ''If you win on Thursday, I'd say it's the greatest thing ever, because you get that long break after,'' Nolan said Monday at a news conference. ''But it's tough on coaches, tough on players. It's why we have a game once a week. The game is physical. We're not playing baseball or basketball, or some other game. Even the guys that aren't severely injured have a lot of bumps and bruises.''
        The diminished recovery time for injured players has been the coaches' primary complaint. Seattle's Mike Holmgren said that the starting offensive lineman Floyd Womack was not expected to play against San Francisco because of a groin injury.
        ''In a normal week, you might be able to get him back,'' Holmgren said Monday. ''This late in the season, guys take just a tad longer to recover. But San Francisco's got to go through the same thing we are.''
        Holmgren said he voiced his concerns about playing Thursday games late in the season when he was a member of the league's competition committee.
        ''It's like fighting City Hall,'' Holmgren said. ''You can have an opinion. You might listen to it briefly, but you're the only one. The league's not going to listen to it. The owners certainly aren't. It's the NFL Network. We did have conversations when I was on the competition committee with the people about this. I voiced my opinion.''
        What was the reaction to Holmgren's opinion?
        ''Thank you,'' Holmgren said.
        This is Holmgren's 15th season as a head coach, but he is still uncertain about the best way to prepare for Thursday games. He had originally planned to practice Monday, but after the Seahawks lost, 27-21, at Arizona on Sunday, Holmgren changed his mind. Instead he had the players watch videotapes and lift weights before he sent them home.
        The Seahawks (8-5) can clinch the National Football Conference West with a victory, and they are also battling for playoff seeding, making the game against the 49ers more significant and adding to Holmgren's worries. The 49ers (5-8) defeated the Seahawks, 20-14, in San Francisco earlier this season.
        ''You see the scores on Sundays,'' Holmgren said. ''Nothing should surprise anyone anymore. Anybody's capable of beating anyone else. It's hard on us. It's great for the fans. In our league, at the beginning of the year, there's tremendous optimism in every city with fans, even if you've had a rough year the year before, because of free agency.
        ''You only play 16 games. I think that's why the N.F.L. and professional football now is at the height of its popularity. Going into the last couple of weeks of the season, and having so many teams still in this thing, is great for fan interest.''
        The flip side of playing Thursday night games is that teams have more time to rest afterward. Some teams have used extra time off to their advantage, most noticeably the Baltimore Ravens (10-3). After their bye week in October, the Ravens jumped to a 35-7 lead on New Orleans before cruising to a 35-22 victory. After losing a Thursday night game in Cincinnati on Nov. 30, Ravens Coach Brian Billick gave his team five days off. The players responded positively by winning last Sunday at Kansas City, 20-10.
        ''This team, now twice, has shown what, given a little time off and a chance to heal up, they can do,'' Billick said.
        All coaches agree with Nolan, that a Thursday game does not seem so bad if you win. Coaches, however, will keep fretting about them. That is what happens when you interfere with their routine.
        ''Players turn the page rather quickly,'' Holmgren said. ''Coaches are the ones who don't turn the page.''
        FOOTBALL
      