
        About seven years ago, the State Senate's majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, met a wealthy investor from the Albany area, Jared E. Abbruzzese, through a mutual friend, and they quickly bonded over their shared affection for thoroughbred horses.
        His love of horses inspired Mr. Abbruzzese to join a group of investors competing to operate the state's thoroughbred horse racing tracks. And now Mr. Bruno, his friend and occasional companion at horse racing events, will play a central role in awarding that franchise.
        In Albany, friendships between lawmakers and people with business before the state are hardly uncommon. But Mr. Bruno and Mr. Abbruzzese have developed a relationship that is unusually close even by Albany standards -- one that state lobbying officials are now scrutinizing, though Mr. Bruno says no conflicts were involved.
        Over the past four years, two of Mr. Abbruzzese's companies have contributed more than $118,000 to a campaign committee controlled by Mr. Bruno. Mr. Abbruzzese's wife bought property for $90,000 from a group involving Mr. Bruno. Mr. Bruno has also flown on Mr. Abbruzzese's private jet at least half a dozen times. And in a February 2005 transaction that has not been previously reported, Mr. Bruno bought 2,000 shares in a small Texas securities brokerage in which Mr. Abbruzzese was intimately involved. Mr. Bruno says he invested in the firm, Tejas Inc., after discussing it with Mr. Abbruzzese.
        The firm's stock was not traded on any major exchanges and Mr. Abbruzzese's own financial advisory company merged with Tejas several months later.
        Over the same period, Mr. Bruno, the Legislature's most powerful Republican, has been helpful to Mr. Abbruzzese. He has directed at least $500,000 in state money to Evident Technologies, a small, privately held nanotechnology firm that Mr. Abbruzzese financed. He was also instrumental in obtaining $2.5 million in state aid for a joint development project involving Evident and Russell Sage College in Troy, N.Y., last year.
        A spokesman for Mr. Bruno, John McArdle, said there were no conflicts of interest in the two men's relationship. He noted that Mr. Bruno ultimately lost money on the Tejas investment, although the stock's price rose for at least two months after Mr. Bruno bought it.
        He also said Mr. Bruno never talked to Mr. Abbruzzese about the state aid to Evident Technologies or about the purchase of property by Mr. Abbruzzese's wife, Sherrie. The two men are friends who happen to share ''a mutual love of horses,'' he said.
        ''There's no conflict there,'' Mr. McArdle said.
        Neither Mr. Abbruzzese nor his lawyer responded to numerous messages over the past week.
        The Legislature -- led by Mr. Bruno and Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver -- and Governor-elect Eliot Spitzer will decide who gets the horse racing franchise, and a group including Mr. Abbruzzese is one of three that are in the running. The franchise entails operating the Aqueduct, Belmont and Saratoga tracks, which take in a combined $2.7 billion in bets each year.
        The state's lobbying commission is investigating Mr. Bruno's use of Mr. Abbruzzese's Mitsubishi MU-300 business jet, trying to determine whether Mr. Abbruzzese violated state laws by allowing Mr. Bruno free or discounted use of the plane even as Mr. Abbruzzese's group was lobbying on the racing franchise.
        Aside from the issue of the plane rides, whether any of Mr. Bruno's dealings with Mr. Abbruzzese potentially run afoul of state laws is open to interpretation.
        One section of the ethics law exempts legislators from the specific prohibition on state officials making personal investments, like Mr. Bruno's Tejas stock, that could pose a conflict. Mr. Bruno was not even required to disclose his ownership of the stock.
        However, another section broadly prohibits state officials, including lawmakers, from accepting any gift worth more than $75. A stock tip could qualify as a gift, several legal experts said, if it could be assigned a value at the time it was given. Mr. Bruno bought his shares through a public offering of Tejas stock, directly from the underwriter, a relatively exclusive process not easily accessible by average investors.
        While getting in early on a public offering, as Mr. Bruno did with Tejas, often requires knowing someone involved in it, such favoritism is common in investment banking and is generally not considered illegal.
        Mr. McArdle said that although Mr. Bruno talked to Mr. Abbruzzese about buying Tejas stock, the conversation did not amount to a tip. Mr. McArdle said that the senator could not recall precisely how he first learned of the potential investment, but that he also talked to the chief executive of Tejas before deciding to buy the stock.
        In any event, Mr. McArdle asserted, the issue is moot because Mr. Bruno lost $19,000 on the investment. For more than three months, however, his shares were worth as much as $10,000 more than he paid for them.
        Some ethics experts contend that the value of an investment is irrelevant to whether there is a potential conflict.
        ''The motivation is the issue, not the result,'' said Richard D. Emery, a Manhattan lawyer who served on the State Government Integrity Commission in the 1980s and is part of a panel advising Mr. Spitzer on government reforms.
        David Grandeau, the executive director of the lobbying commission, declined to comment, as did Melissa Ryan, executive director of the Legislative Ethics Committee, a panel of lawmakers who review conflict-of-interest cases involving their peers.
        The ties between Mr. Bruno and Mr. Abbruzzese run deeper than mutual business interests. The two men have been friends for about seven years, and each has owned horses.
        For most of the 1990s, when Mr. Bruno was rising through the ranks in the Senate, Mr. Abbruzzese, 52, ran a communications company, CAI Wireless Systems, which he sold to WorldCom in 1999 for about $400 million. Since then, Mr. Abbruzzese has offered financial advisory and consulting services in the Albany area, where Mr. Bruno has worked to stimulate the growth of technology companies through legislative initiatives.
        Mr. Bruno has been the driving force behind several state-financed investments in Evident Technologies, including grants in 2002 and 2004 totaling $500,000. (The firm has also received aid from the administration of George E. Pataki.) Evident, a maker of sophisticated materials used in optical devices, was founded in 2000 with financing arranged by Mr. Abbruzzese, and securities filings show that in 2004 his consulting firm owned stock in Evident valued at about $310,000.
        Evident executives did not respond to requests for comment. Mr. McArdle said the state grants to Evident had nothing to do with Mr. Abbruzzese, and were intended to support a worthy local company that was trying to expand and add jobs. ''What we've done with Evident is no different than what we've done countless times with other companies,'' he said.
        In November 2004, a limited liability company controlled by Mr. Abbruzzese's wife bought an undeveloped plot of land in Rensselaer County for $90,000 from a partnership involving Mr. Bruno, according to county property records. Mr. McArdle said that the senator's 25 percent interest in the partnership had been placed in a blind trust in 1992, and that he had ''no involvement whatsoever'' in any of its dealings after that, including the sale to Mrs. Abbruzzese.
        A month later, Mr. Abbruzzese and others founded Friends of New York Racing. The group registered as a lobbying entity, and eventually produced a report contending that the state's three thoroughbred racetracks, operated since 1955 by the nonprofit New York Racing Association, should be contracted to a private commercial enterprise.
        As Friends of New York Racing was getting off the ground, Mr. Abbruzzese was busy with another, unrelated business venture -- one where his interests would soon intersect with Mr. Bruno's. This time it involved Tejas, a small brokerage in Austin, Tex., whose stock had once traded for as little as 63 cents and was held by only about 400 people at that time, in early 2005.
        Mr. Abbruzzese's company worked closely with Tejas on a joint project in 2004, and by early 2005 they had embarked on plans to merge, according to securities filings. The merger was publicly announced in early May; Mr. Abbruzzese was made vice chairman of Tejas and became one of its largest shareholders.
        Although Tejas did not have a well-established market for its stock, it came to Mr. Bruno's attention in early 2005. His decision to buy came just a few days after he flew to Washington on Mr. Abbruzzese's private jet. Mr. McArdle said the trip was for political purposes, paid with campaign funds, and did not involve Mr. Bruno's investment in Tejas.
        Mr. Bruno paid the public offering price of $15.75 a share, and over the following weeks the stock rose as high as $20.90, before taking a long downward slide to end the year at about $6 a share. He sold his shares in December 2005 for a $19,000 loss, according to a trade confirmation statement his office provided.
        A spokesman for Tejas said the company would not comment on its dealings with Mr. Abbruzzese or Mr. Bruno's investment.
        Because Mr. Bruno lost money on the stock, and liquidated it before the end of the year, he was not required to list it on the annual financial disclosure report he filed with the ethics committee. But in May 2005, an aide who was preparing his 2004 disclosure mistakenly included it, making it appear that he owned the stock in 2004, a year in which the value of Tejas shares skyrocketed almost 900 percent. After The New York Times raised questions about the stock, Mr. Bruno's staff provided documentation showing he actually invested in 2005, and lost money.
        Throughout 2005, as Mr. Bruno continued to hold his Tejas shares, he and Mr. Abbruzzese met often, according to records filed in State Supreme Court in Albany in connection with the lobbying inquiry. The documents include testimony from the former director of Friends of New York Racing, who said Mr. Abbruzzese invited him to chat with Mr. Bruno about the state racing franchise ''during an informal visit by the senator to Mr. Abbruzzese's home'' in the spring of 2005. The former director, Timothy Smith, later referred to the meeting in a memorandum to the group's board, saying it had been arranged by Mr. Bruno's ''close friend'' Mr. Abbruzzese.
        Friends of New York Racing disbanded this year, and many of its members, including Mr. Abbruzzese, re-emerged as investors in a new group, Empire Racing Associates, one of the three competing to operate the state's horse racing system.
        Empire Racing narrowly lost a round in the bidding process last month when the Ad Hoc Committee on the Future of Racing, created by Governor Pataki, issued a recommendation favoring a competitor, Excelsior Racing.
        In his response to the committee's findings, which are not binding, Mr. Bruno used a horse racing metaphor to emphasize the closeness of the outcome, calling it ''a photo finish between the two top bidders.''
      