
        A book can be judged by its cover, and appearances are not so deceiving.
        That is the lesson of ''Identity,'' an NBC game show that begins tonight and requires a contestant to match 12 occupations with 12 strangers entirely by how they look. The fat lady in a magenta ball gown does indeed turn out to be the opera singer. The Asian man in a kimono jacket and black headband is, sure enough, the sushi chef. It's a little harder to determine which young woman is the kidney donor, but the process of elimination is a huge help.
        As Penn Jillette, the show's host, puts it, ''This show is all about snap judgments.''
        It is also a perverse premise in a society where people are always being instructed not to give in to prejudice or facile stereotypes. The classic game shows of yesteryear like ''What's My Line?'' and ''To Tell the Truth'' sought to confound panelists' expectations and biases. Celebrities like Bennett Cerf and Kitty Carlisle asked a lot of questions and were still regularly stumped by mystery guests who turned out to not to fit preconceived notions.
        ''Identity'' is to game shows what a gastric bypass is to dieting: a choice that defies convention and social niceties.
        The strangers are essentially props and are not competing for any prizes. The contestant is the sole player, encouraged to ham up his or her feelings of anxiety and suspense, but there really isn't very much tension to the game. The real contest is in the back room: just as players on game shows push their luck to keep trying for the top prize, networks keep tempting fate by adding more game shows to their schedules. NBC had a huge hit with ''Deal or No Deal,'' and then tried another, similar game show, ''1 vs. 100,'' that was not as successful. The network is now betting on ''Identity,'' which also looks and sounds a lot like ''Deal or No Deal,'' or, for that matter, the 1999 hit, ''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire.''
        Mr. Jillette, a comedian and magician who is the taller, chattier half of Penn & Teller, does not try to be funny on ''Identity.'' Instead he is more like the Ghost of Game Shows Past, solemnly guiding each player through steps that are time tested and very familiar. He even drags out his signature phrase, ''What (beat) is (beat) your (beat) identity?'' in the style of Regis Philbin when he was the host of ''Millionaire.''
        The strangers are standing on pedestals on a theatrically lighted stage, in costumes that hint quite broadly at their status in life. A girl identified only as ''the youngest'' in the group was obligingly dressed in white knee socks, a tartan miniskirt and white blouse cut above the navel -- a pornographer's rendition of a Catholic schoolgirl.
        The unidentified strangers do not speak or move; instead they stare impassively into space. When Mr. Jillette asks them to reveal their identities, they do so with cutesy phrases. ''It's not a croc,'' the alligator wrestler replies. ''I wrestle alligators.''
        The player wins money for each correct guess: a perfect score nets $500,000. An incorrect guess on the last round means going home empty-handed. Each contestant is allowed to consult a team of loved ones -- husbands, mothers-in-law and the like -- as well as a panel of consultants. On the show sent for review, the advisers included a body language expert, a psychologist, and Christopher Whitcomb, a former F.B.I. agent who was identified by the show as an F.B.I. behavioral expert.
        But since the strangers do not move, speak or behave, it's hard to see what the experts bring to the game besides prolongation: each show lasts an hour.
        ''Identity'' relies on snap judgments, but they are not snappy enough.
        Identity
        NBC, tonight at 9, Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time.
        Ben Silverman, H. T. Owens, Andrew Golder, Tim Puntillo, executive producers; Mark Koops and Chris Grant, co-executive producers; Penn Jillette, host. A Reveille production.
        TELEVISION REVIEW
      