
        LOSING FAITH IN CHINA NEGOTIATOR -- American officials entering into trade negotiations with China are growing skeptical that Wu Yi, left, a vice premier of China and its highest-ranking female official, has the inclination and the clout to challenge the party apparatus that is tied to the sprawling state-owned export industries. [Page C1.]
        THE DOWNSIDE OF AIRLINE MERGERS -- The prospect of higher profits and the end of several years of financial misery has stimulated new merger talks among airlines. But misery may be a zero-sum game: passengers may have more crowded flights and higher fares to look forward to. [C1.]
        ADVOCATING FOR DEREGULATION -- The Securities and Exchange Commission, responding to criticism that regulators had overreacted to years of major corporate scandals, issued a flurry of deregulatory orders and proposals intended to lower costs to public companies. [C1.]
        H.P. BOARD CUTS TIE WITH LAWYER -- Hewlett-Packard's board has ended a crucial advisory relationship with Larry W. Sonsini, the powerful Silicon Valley lawyer, in the wake of the company's spying scandal. [C1.]
        SCRUTINY OF DIAMOND TRADE -- Consumers are asking more questions about diamonds in the wake of a movie that denounces the practices of the diamond industry. [G1.]
        SNOWSHOE MAKERS AIM FOR YOUTH -- The snowshoe industry, afraid that youngsters see their sport as an old person's alternative to snowboarding, has developed marketing campaigns aimed at children. [G10.]
        PANEL CALLS FOR SUICIDE WARNING -- Strong warning labels on antidepressants about suicide risk should be extended to include not only children and adolescents but adults under 25, a federal advisory panel concluded. [A36.]
        P.& G. GETS PROVOCATIVE -- Procter & Gamble, once known as much for its moral rectitude as its soaps and detergents, is pushing further into the brave world of new media with a provocative effort asserting that men can suffer from menstrual cramps. Advertising: Stuart Elliott. [C3.]
        INQUIRY INTO BP TRADES -- BP, the oil giant, said that regulators were considering bringing civil charges against the company in connection with trading activities in the gasoline futures market four years ago. [C3.]
        MERRILL LYNCH IS FORGIVEN -- The board of supervisors of Orange County in California, which once accused Merrill Lynch of helping tip it into bankruptcy, voted to put the investment bank on its list of firms qualified to provide it with underwriting services. [C3.]
        QANTAS ACCEPTS OFFER -- Qantas Airways agreed to accept a sweetened buyout offer of 11.1 billion Australian dollars ($8.7 billion) from a consortium led by Macquarie Bank and the Texas Pacific Group. [C4.]
        JETBLUE TO ADD LEGROOM -- JetBlue Airways, trying to improve its appeal to travelers and cut costs in one move, said that it planned to remove a row of seats from all 96 of its Airbus 320 planes, giving the front 11 rows 36 inches between seatbacks, instead of the current 32 inches. [C4.]
        JUMP IN RETAIL SALES -- Retail sales jumped sharply in November as shoppers went on a spending spree that is likely to reinforce the Federal Reserve's view that the cooling housing market has not hurt the rest of the economy. [C6.]
        S.& P. NEARS SIX-YEAR HIGH -- The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index approached a six-year high as retailers rallied on the first sales increase since July and energy producers benefited from rising oil prices. [C6.]
        MORTGAGE PAYMENTS LAG -- The number of people paying their mortgages late -- or not paying them at all -- picked up in recent months, a trend that is expected to continue well into next year. [C6.]
        I.B.M. TEAMS UP WITH UNIVERSITIES -- I.B.M. and seven universities have agreed to embark on a series of collaborative software research projects and to make the results of the work in fields like privacy, security and medical decision-making freely available. [C11.]
        BROADCASTING FINE UPHELD -- The Supreme Administrative Court of Thailand upheld a decision against a local broadcaster, iTV, that appeared likely to force it to close. [C13.]
        ONLINE
        WINES OF THE TIMES -- Merlots from Washington State have a structure and earthiness that you rarely see in the typically plusher, softer California versions. An interactive report is at nytimes.com/multimedia.
        DISCOVERY AT NIGHT -- In the first nighttime launching in more than four years, the shuttle began a mission of space station rewiring. A slide show of the launching is at nytimes.com/multimedia.
        Business Briefing  Articles on these developments are at nytimes.com/business.
        MONSTER WORLDWIDE, owner of the most used online job-listing service, reduced past earnings by $271.9 million to correct stock-based compensation costs, and disclosed more than $500,000 in improper payments to its founder. (BLOOMBERG NEWS)
        THE BRITISH MAGAZINE publisher Emap announced that it would close the American edition of FHM magazine because of the difficult advertising market. (REUTERS)
        THE FOUNDER of the ''Girls Gone Wild'' video empire was sentenced to community service and his company was fined $1.6 million for using drunken 17-year-olds in videos it filmed on Panama City Beach, Fla., during spring break. (AP)
      