
        For LaDainian Tomlinson, the touchdowns keep coming, the records keep falling, and the San Diego Chargers keep winning.
        With Tomlinson scoring two touchdowns, including a career-long 85-yard burst during the second quarter, the Chargers (12-2) maintained the best record in the American Football Conference with a 20-9 victory against the Kansas City Chiefs.
        Tomlinson, who ran for 199 yards on 25 carries, has done things this season that no other running back has ever done. He has more touchdowns (31), more rushing touchdowns (28), and more points (186) in one season than any player in N.F.L. history. With his two touchdowns, Tomlinson broke the league's previous single-season scoring record of Paul Hornung, who scored 176 points in 1960.
        ''It stood for 46 years, and it's kind of mind-boggling to me that this year it happens, and the record falls,'' Tomlinson said. ''I always tell you that records are meant to be broken, but some records seem like they're untouchable. To me, out of all of them, that's a tremendous accomplishment, not only for me, but for the guys on the offensive unit.''
        Tomlinson said that he injured his jaw late in the game, but that he did not believe it was serious.
        ''I'm going to get it X-rayed, just for precautionary reasons,'' Tomlinson said.
        This game was billed as a showdown between Tomlinson and Chiefs running back Larry Johnson, who finished with 19 carries for 84 yards. But at this point, comparing Tomlinson to any other running back seems almost unfair.
        Tomlinson's 85-yard run was swift and spectacular, the kind of play that takes the starch out of an opponent. The Chiefs trailed by only 7-3 at that point, and they had just forced San Diego to punt. But after Mike Scifres had his punt blocked by Bernard Pollard, the Chiefs' Derrick Ross muffed the recovery, and David Binn of San Diego picked up the ball and ran for a first down.
        Instead of getting the ball deep in San Diego territory after the blocked punt, the Chiefs were forced to play defense again. And on the next play, Tomlinson made the Chiefs pay. Running through a hole on the left side of the line, Tomlinson accelerated into the secondary and raced down the sideline.
        ''When you draw it up on the chalkboard, that's how it's supposed to happen,'' Tomlinson said. ''It was absolutely perfect. Everybody got their block. I actually saw the safety take a bad angle, and once I saw that, I felt like I was running track again.''
        This was an emotional game for the Chiefs, coming just a few days after the death of Lamar Hunt, their owner who died Wednesday. But whatever inspiration the Chiefs had was snuffed out by San Diego's defense, which kept consistent pressure on Kansas City quarterback Trent Green.
        The defeat did damage to the playoff hopes of Kansas City (7-7), which visits Oakland on Saturday. The Chiefs defeated the Chargers earlier this season, but the Chiefs have lost three consecutive games, and they have scored only one touchdown in their past two games.
        San Diego appeared headed for a huge offensive night earlier, driving 74 yards to score on its first possession. The drive was kept alive by a fake punt on fourth down from San Diego's 43. Michael Turner lined up in front of the punter and took a direct snap from center, catching the Chiefs off guard and running 25 yards for a first down. Three plays later, Tomlinson did what he does so well, taking a handoff from the 15-yard line, veering to his right past Kansas City's defense, and running 15 yards untouched into the end zone.
        From that point, however, the Chargers failed to move the ball consistently, largely because quarterback Philip Rivers had a poor night, completing only 8 of 23 passes for 93 yards. After throwing a particularly poor pass in the third quarter, he took off his helmet and angrily threw it to the ground.
        ''I'll learn from it,'' Rivers said of his performance. ''I'm glad I'm on this team. If your quarterback performs like that on another night, the outcome might not be that good.''
        The Chargers are one game ahead of the Baltimore Ravens (11-3) in the race to finish with the best record in the conference. San Diego lost at Baltimore earlier this season, and with two games left in the regular season, Tomlinson said the team was focused on securing the No. 1 seeding. Tomlinson has carried the Chargers to the playoffs, but he wants to carry them to the Super Bowl.
        ''You look at teams like Baltimore, Cincinnati's playing well, Indianapolis,'' Tomlinson said. ''Baltimore, we played there earlier this season, so we know how difficult it can be. The whole focus is to remain the first seed in the A.F.C. and to get that first-round bye. I feel like it's halfway through the season. Hopefully, we have five more games left.''
        PRO FOOTBALL
      