
        TO stroll into Bergdorf Goodman this holiday season and see a line of candy-colored plastic watches prominently displayed near Chanel and Cartier timepieces is cause for a double take. These playful imposters, called ToyWatches, are an irreverent polycarbonate riff on classic Rolex style and have been a runaway hit since their debut earlier this year.
        ''It's a sporty-chic look,'' said Taylor Tomasi, the accessories director of Teen Vogue, a magazine that has mastered the high-low sensibility. ''It's not necessarily about status or luxury anymore.''
        Well, it sort of is.
        Given the ubiquity of cellphones and P.D.A.'s and iPods that display the hour, no one truly needs a watch to keep time. But as a visible cue to your style, nothing is quite as expressive. Sporty plastic and rubber designs like the ones shown here are not just utilitarian, they also send a message: unpretentious, fun.
        In 2000, when Chanel introduced its first-ever sports watch, the Chanel J12, made from a high-tech ceramic, watch enthusiasts were skeptical. But even at $3,350, it became one of the company's best-selling accessories. This year, Chanel came out with an ultralight black watch with a rubber band that goes for $5,350. And Cartier has just introduced the Pasha Seatimer, a sleek heavy-duty watch with a black rubber band selling for $5,100. Created for men, it is sought after by women as well.
        When a watch with a rubber band can still be a sizable investment, ones like the ToyWatch, which sell for $150 to $275, give shallow-pocketed shoppers a shortcut to split-second chic. At only 2.2 ounces (a fraction more than that other plastic adult amusement, the iPod nano), they are lightweights with serious cachet. Graziano de Boni, the president of Valentino USA, opted to wear his to a black-tie event.
        ''It's part of the design-for-style sensibility, regardless of price,'' he explained. ''Plus, it's a new new thing.''
        Fine Points
      