
        The review of Iraq policy by senior commanders appears to be headed toward a recommendation to increase the size of the American military, both to sustain a long-term commitment in Iraq and to leave the United States better positioned to deal with potential adversaries, in particular Iran and North Korea, Pentagon and military officials said Thursday.
        The latest indication came when the Army chief of staff, Gen. Peter J. Schoomaker, called for expanding the force by adding more active-duty troops and by making more use of the National Guard and Reserve.
        His statement, on Thursday, came a day after President Bush met with the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Pentagon's secure conference room to discuss reshaping strategy in Iraq. That session, officials said, included a detailed discussion of whether the armed services are large enough to sustain the mission in Iraq and meet other global security threats.
        Officials who took part in the session or who were briefed on it would not give specific figures that were being discussed for growth goals. But their descriptions revealed a broad conclusion that has received increasing support in Washington: that regardless of the exact shape of President Bush's new strategy on Iraq, the Army and Marine Corps are stretched thin by their commitments around the globe, in particular in Iraq.
        That conclusion is being punctuated by the departure of Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, who officially leaves his post on Friday and who was long the champion of the idea that high technology and better intelligence could substitute for a bigger military.
        Although expanding the Army's size would be too slow a process to provide immediate relief for the force in Iraq, several ideas are being considered to fill the short-term demand for troops there, especially in Baghdad.
        One proposal being studied, according to Pentagon officials, is accelerating the arrival in Iraq of a handful of combat brigades already scheduled to deploy there in 2007. Sending troops in early or keeping soldiers in Iraq past their scheduled departure has been a way to temporarily increase American troop presence in Iraq without ordering in forces that had not been on the deployment roster.
        A new study by the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative research group in Washington, that was released on Thursday also called for a surge of forces to Baghdad over the near term on the grounds that the nascent Iraqi security force is not up to the task.
        The report was written by the military historian Frederick W. Kagan and by Jack Keane, the retired general who served as vice chief of staff of the Army. It calls for adding four to five additional combat brigades to Baghdad and deploying them in neighborhoods that have mixed Sunni and Shiite populations and have been the scene of sectarian violence.
        The report argues that this can be done without stretching the Army and Marines to the breaking point, but it also advocates increasing both forces by a total of at least 30,000 per year for the next two years.
        At the Pentagon, even those not supporting the surge option argue that the Army needs to grow to sustain the force levels required in Afghanistan and Iraq and to meet other national security threats.
        Officials who were briefed on the president's discussion with the Joint Chiefs said there was a consensus that the review of administration strategy in Iraq must be broadened to include decisions on how to prepare the American military for the global counterterrorism mission beyond Iraq.
        In particular, they said there was a need to show enough force strength to deter potential adversaries from aggressive moves based on an assumption that American power was bogged down in Iraq.
        ''A lot of it was discussed yesterday with President Bush,'' said a senior Pentagon official who was briefed on the discussions by one of those in attendance.
        The nation faces three choices or ''we will break the active component,'' General Schoomaker said in an appearance before the Commission on the National Guard and Reserves. He said the choices included reducing demand on the military, which seems unlikely; gaining the guaranteed ability to mobilize the National Guard and Reserve; and increasing the size of the active forces.
        On the last point, said that ''current demand on the force makes this a wise and prudent action.'' He gave no figure on his goal for the Army, but noted that even in an optimistic best case, the Army probably could grow by only 6,000 to 7,000 soldiers per year.
        Congress authorized a 30,000-soldier increase in the active-duty Army after the Sept. 11 attacks in what was described as a temporary measure. Army officials say they hope to reach that authorized total troop strength of 512,000 by next year.
        Gen. Gordon R. Sullivan, the former Army chief of staff who now heads the Association of the U.S. Army, a private support group, said in an interview that senior Army officers have told him in recent months that the service needs an active duty strength of some 535,000 to 540,000. General Sullivan said that figure assumed assured access to mobilize the National Guard and Reserves.
        General Sullivan said his personal view was that the Army needed to have an active duty strength of more than 600,000 if such ability to mobilize the Guard and Reserves could not be guaranteed.
        He noted that there has been a debate over the past few years as to whether the Army deployments were a ''spike'' or a ''plateau.''
        ''Surely, we know by now that it is a plateau,'' he said. ''We are sending people back with 12 months dwell time. One reason we are doing it is that we don't have enough to spread this commitment out.''
        THE REACH OF WAR
      