
        The United States Justice Department filed a lawsuit on Friday against this Westchester County village, charging that its at-large voting system illegally diminishes Hispanic influence.
        The suit, which contends that the system violates the Voting Rights Act, seeks an injunction that could scuttle Board of Trustees elections in March.
        ''The right to vote is the bedrock of our government,'' Michael J. Garcia, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, said in a statement. ''The at-large system of electing Port Chester's Board of Trustees dilutes the votes of Port Chester's minority citizens and undermines democracy.''
        Mayor Gerald L. Logan criticized the government's lawsuit as ''unfortunate and heavy-handed.''
        ''We are extremely disappointed that the government chose divisive litigation instead of direct communication,'' he said. ''There appears to be no interest in working cooperatively with Port Chester.''
        The Justice Department notified officials in April that it intended to file a lawsuit if they did not take steps to set up a district-based voting system. The department provided three separate plans to break the village into voting districts. On Dec. 4, the village board voted to notify the department that it did not believe the current system violated the act, setting the stage for a court battle.
        According to the lawsuit, the village's at-large system -- in which all residents vote for each member of the board of trustees -- allows for white-bloc voting that prevents Hispanic voters from electing their preferred candidates. The government noted that more than 46 percent of the village's population and 21.9 percent of its voting-age citizens are Hispanic. Still, no Hispanic person has been elected to public office in the village.
        The United States attorney's office also cited instances of what it said was voting polarized by race and ethnicity, as well as a history of anti-Hispanic discrimination in New York State, Westchester County and the village.
        The court filing was supported by affidavits from residents and former candidates for either the board of trustees or the school board who are Hispanic or African-American and who identified what they said were instances of racial or ethnic appeals to undermine their candidacies. They also cited cases in which they said support in a smaller community was canceled out by white voting in other areas.
        Anthony Piscionere, who is representing the village, said that officials were open to making changes to assure all ethnic groups and races were represented in elections. But, he said, three experts hired to review the Justice Department's data found it did not support the contention that the village violated the Voting Rights Act.
        In addition, he said, districting the 2.4-square-mile village would be costly and have long-term consequences.
        ''If the evidence doesn't support the action, would you do it?'' he said.
        He said a Voters Rights Commission had been formed to increase voter participation. Mayor Logan noted that while according to the 2000 Census there were more than 3,000 Latinos of voting age in Port Chester, only 2,600 people voted in the last election and the winning candidate received 1,659 votes.
        ''It is apparent to all who know our village that we face apathy and not discrimination,'' he said.
        But according to statements of former Hispanic and African-American candidates filed with the government's lawsuit, a problem does exist.
        Cesar Ruiz, who ran unsuccessfully for trustee in March 2001, said he felt it was impossible for a Hispanic or African-American candidate to be elected under the current system. He recalled a supporter who told him: ''I like you, you're a good guy. I've known you for years. But the Democrats are telling me not to vote for you because you are Hispanic.''
        Graciela Heymann, executive director of the Westchester Hispanic Coalition, a service and advocacy group that has an office in Port Chester, said it was difficult to say who was right in the case because of a lack of data.
        However, she said, there was no doubt that there needed to be greater Latino representation in the village. Public hearings on the districting issue have highlighted tensions between longtime residents and Latinos who have recently moved there.
        ''I really feel that Port Chester is like a tale of two cities with people living separate lives,'' she said.
      