
        In a trial that began Monday in Delaware Chancery Court, a judge is being asked to decide whether Valassis Communications can back out of its deal to purchase Advo, a direct mail marketing company it agreed to buy for $1.3 billion.
        Valassis, based in Livonia, Mich., provides advertising inserts for newspapers. It sued Advo in August, contending in court papers that Advo's ''fraudulent misrepresentations'' of its finances activated an escape clause in their July 6 merger agreement.
        Advo countersued, and said that Valassis was bound by the agreement and that the real reason for ending the deal was ''buyer's remorse,'' not what Advo described as ''immaterial errors'' with no long-term effect on its earning potential.
        The Valassis-Advo battle has been compared to the unsuccessful attempt in 2001 by Tyson Foods, the meat-processing company, to rescind a proposed merger with Iowa Beef Processors. Vice Chancellor Leo E. Strine Jr., who is also hearing the Valassis case, ruled for Iowa Beef in that case and compelled Tyson to close the deal.
        The chairman and chief executive of Valassis, Alan F. Schultz, testified on Monday that for years he had sought a way to combine with Advo's direct-mail business. But when the merger was announced, he said, investor reaction was ''negative, very negative.''
        Two days after the merger deal was signed, Valassis stock had dropped 20.5 percent. Analysts said that the merger would not solve underlying problems at Valassis, which was facing stiff competition.
        Under questioning by a Valassis lawyer, Eric Landau, Mr. Schultz said he would not have recommended the merger to his board had he known that Advo would significantly miss its earnings projections in the second quarter of 2006, had understated postal expenses by $1.5 million, and that Advo's chief financial officer, Jeffrey E. Epstein, had reduced the 2006 earnings forecast to $54 million from $76.1 million.
        Had he known about the lowered forecast and other problems, Mr. Schwartz said, ''It certainly would have made me question Mr. Epstein's presentation'' in which the Advo executive had declared the 2007 forecast ''was a number we could take to the bank.''
        ''They had extracted every penny they possibly could out of us,'' he said about Valassis's eventual offer of $37 a share, which Advo accepted.
        Advo, which is based in Windsor, Conn., has contended that the purpose of the lawsuit is not to end the deal but to drive down its price.
        Asked during a break in the trial if he would pursue an Advo deal at a lower price, Mr. Schwartz responded with laughter.
        Mr. Schwartz also testified that in a meeting in late August with Advo's chairman, John J. Mahoney, and its chief executive, S. Scott Harding, he asked them to come up with a ''business solution'' to the impasse.
        ''I told Scott we're prepared to file a lawsuit to rescind this deal'' but hoped they would be able instead to ''talk about a deal consistent with the new financial status of Advo,'' Mr. Schwartz said.
        Mr. Harding's response, he said, was, ''We'll see you in court.''
        The trial is scheduled to continue through Dec. 22.
        MEDIA
      