
        To the Editor:
        Re ''In New Twist on Tuition Game, Popularity Rises With the Price'' (front page, Dec. 12):
        The notion that people want to apply to colleges that have higher tuitions seems utterly ridiculous to me.
        As a student at Brooklyn College, which I am attending after transferring from a much more expensive private university in Manhattan, I am thrilled with the education I am receiving. Though I may have access to fewer resources, the college trains me to take more initiative, an invaluable tool for any student.
        Brooklyn College's array of dedicated and diverse students and its beautiful campus, not to mention the low price tag, only sweeten the deal.
        People drawn to schools with pricey tuitions seem akin to people who dress in only brand-name clothes; it may look and sound flashier, but it basically serves the same purpose.
        Tova Stulman  Brooklyn, Dec. 12, 2006
        To the Editor:
        As I finish my college applications, I often wonder how the American education system is supposed to stay competitive with other countries when the tuition to attend a private college for four years rivals the cost of a house.
        With tax cuts for the rich, and the lower and middle classes bearing the burden of the war in Iraq, even public colleges and universities are becoming less of a viable option for millions of Americans. Until America figures out a way to make college a feasible option for every hard-working student, it will lag behind the pace of the rest of the world.
        Jamie Fleishman  Poughkeepsie, N.Y., Dec. 12, 2006
        To the Editor:
        I am disheartened after reading that institutions like Ursinus College and the University of Notre Dame set tuition prices, at least in part, based upon what other colleges charge. In the business world, one could call this collusion and price fixing, but apparently not in higher education.
        The notion that some schools must raise tuition to compete with their more expensive counterparts is not only doing a great disservice to young people but it's also utterly ridiculous.
        If colleges and universities want more qualified applicants, they should increase advertising dollars and the budget of the office of admissions, and invest in resources that support a great learning environment for students, faculty and staff members.
        Adam C. Reinke  Boston, Dec. 12, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Your article rings a bell with me.
        In 1982, I published a book called ''Cutting College Costs: A Parent's Guide,'' in which I suggested various strategies, one of which was finding a college less expensive than its peers.
        One of my nominees was Swarthmore, because it had been consistently less expensive than its Philadelphia area peers like the University of Pennsylvania, Haverford College and Bryn Mawr.
        Although I intended this as a compliment to Swarthmore, its officials apparently didn't take it as such because almost overnight it became the most expensive of the four and remained so for years.
        Bruce H. Donald  Glendale, Ariz., Dec. 12, 2006
        To the Editor:
        It is not surprising that the perception of being a better college is linked to price.
        Indeed, as a ceramic artist, I recall years ago reading an article about a woman who couldn't sell her mugs, plates and bowls at an art fair when they were priced between $8 and $12.
        When a friend told her to raise her prices, she reluctantly agreed to give it a try, and at her next show, she raised the prices to a range of $20 to $28 and sold out!
        The point is, people believe that ''you get what you pay for'' applies to all circumstances, leaving common sense in the dust.
        Stephanie Kiyak  Valdosta, Ga., Dec. 12, 2006
      