
        When Sprint and Nextel agreed to merge two years ago, they had their sights on Cingular and Verizon Wireless, the two biggest cellphone carriers. Despite a healthy start, Sprint-Nextel's move up the ladder has faded in recent months because of troubles integrating their wireless technologies -- CDMA and iDEN -- absorbing affiliates and introducing handsets. Its chief executive, Gary Forsee, spoke about efforts to right Sprint-Nextel's ship. Following are excerpts:
        Q. You've had a couple of quarters of negative subscriber numbers. The market seems to be betting that you've certainly hit bottom and have started to go up again. Is that the way to read the most recent numbers?
        A. Coming off the second quarter we indicated to the market that we were going to miss our guidance for the year and we were very specific as to the reasons. It was a combination of factors around confusion of the brand image in the marketplace; the need to reinvigorate our channels, particularly the third parties, to be sure that our brand was distinctive; and to take a look at the type of customers we were attracting that were having a higher churn rate; and to be sure that we get the iDEN network performance.
        Q. What specifically will require more investment?
        A. Clearly, the iDEN network performance, as we've gone through rebanding and taken capacity out of the markets, puts tension around adding additional capacity to be sure that we support the loyal Nextel customers. To reinvigorate some of our distribution channels implies investment. Historically, some third-party channels were the sweet spot for the business-to-business selling activities that went on with Nextel. Some of those channels over time had become disproportionately aligned with consumer activity and subprime customers. So to move those back into a business-to-business environment will require some investment.
        Q. At the time you're doing all this, you've got Verizon and Cingular really charging ahead. Has it made it more difficult that the two guys in front of you are doing so well?
        A. We are paying attention to what's going on in the marketplace, but paying attention to the things that we need to do and execute better on. There haven't been any dramatic marketplace changes that have had a significantly negative effect on our performance. These have been issues that are more merger-related or related to our own integration challenges than has been any dramatic effect or marketplace change.
        Q. Now that about three-quarters of Americans have cellphones, what is going to happen to the next 25 percent?
        A. There clearly is a trend where the new users to the category are likely buying more prepaid phones. Also, more subprime than historic levels. Subprime just means new people come into the category, it doesn't mean they aren't going to be good users and high value. But it may mean someone that doesn't have a credit history therefore would get categorized as subprime.
        Q. If you're adding folks who, for example, are only going to make 50 minutes of calls a month, what does that do to your profitability over time?
        A. That's a good question. That's one of those historic measures -- revenue per user -- that has been the focus because it was assumed that every user was the same. If you've got a user that's interested in paying $15 a month for security purposes and they're on a family plan, they may not churn once every five years so you would assume then that your cost of serving that customer is different than it would be for a customer with $80 per month revenue. So you've got to be sure that you're segmenting the market differently.
        Q. You are working with the cable companies to introduce wireless products. When investors look at your stock, what should they expect?
        A. This is all about allowing the cable companies to provide three parts of the four-part bundle, and for Sprint to do what it provides well, which is provide wireless. Obviously we get a distribution channel that otherwise may not have been available to us. Cable gets customers that are going to get the benefit of our content coming into the bundle.
        Q. Comcast's name comes up as a potential bidder for your company. Is there any truth Comcast will make a bid?
        A. As you can imagine, we don't comment on any kind of M.& A. or business development activities, but we're a $60 billion market cap company, we have 52 million customers and we're very focused on our strategy and executing against our plan right now.  SATURDAY INTERVIEW
      