
        Elliot Pantoja had long worried about his three younger brothers, who seemed unable to resist the tug of street life in their troubled corner of the Bronx.
        His brothers were drawn in, he said, by a drug dealer known for cultivating teenage boys as drug runners. One of the dealer's tactics was to let the boys keep his guns, giving them a sense of power.
        Mr. Pantoja, who is 20, said he was told that his youngest brother Enrique, 14, was playing with one of the guns on Friday night, next to his brother Luis, 16, in a room of their ground floor apartment on Manor Avenue in Soundview. Another brother, Hector, 15, was in a separate room. Their mother, Carmel Santiago, 51, who is in frail health, was in her bedroom.
        Just after 5 p.m., the gun went off. The bullet blew a nickel-size hole in the drywall separating the living room from the room the two boys were in. The slug tore through the right arm and then the chest of the boys' 65-year-old grandmother, Lydia Santiago. She had been sitting with her back against the wall, watching television.
        A neighbor, Saharrah Thomas, 18, said she heard screams for help and rushed into the apartment, where Ms. Santiago was on the floor in a widening pool of blood. Ms. Thomas said she called for an ambulance, and wrapped a T-shirt tightly around Ms. Santiago's arm.
        ''I could feel her pulse going down and down,'' Ms. Thomas said. Ms. Santiago was soon dead.
        The boys panicked, according to the police. Luis Pantoja hid the gun, and two others, in a basement apartment, the police said.
        All three weapons were seized: a .380 semiautomatic, a 38-caliber revolver and a 9-millimeter semiautomatic. It was not immediately clear which gun had been fired. The police also reported finding crack cocaine and marijuana in Luis Pantoja's bedroom, but no drug charges were immediately filed.
        Enrique Pantoja was arrested and charged with manslaughter and criminal possession of a weapon, according to the police. Luis Pantoja was charged with hindering prosecution and tampering with evidence. Hector Pantoja was questioned and released.
        ''My brothers are really smart. They're good kids,'' Elliot Pantoja said in a tremulous voice yesterday. ''But they get distracted by all the stuff going on in the neighborhood. And they get involved with things they shouldn't be involved with.''
        Ms. Santiago had come from Puerto Rico in June to help care for her daughter and grandsons. She was scheduled to return next month, Elliot Pantoja said.
        The boys' father died 10 years ago and the family was struggling financially, Elliot Pantoja said. Neighbors said Lydia Santiago scraped together extra money by gathering cans and bottles to recycle.
        Elliot Pantoja, a cashier at a Midtown restaurant, was only one in the family with a job. He was returning home from work when the shooting occurred.
        He said he had saved enough to buy his mother a poncho for Christmas, and his grandmother a gold chain with her name on it.
        Neighbors said they had frequently seen the drug dealer, whom they dared not name, in the neighborhood, along with other older men trying to get boys to run drugs.
        A neighbor, Leroy Hull, 48, called the Santiago apartment ''a hot spot,'' adding that he often saw menacing people flow in and out.
        ''It was like a volcano waiting to erupt.''
      