
        New York City's clout on Capitol Hill expanded yesterday with the appointments of two Democratic representatives, Joseph Crowley and Anthony D. Weiner, to influential House committees that help shape tax, energy and health care policy.
        Mr. Crowley's new assignment on the Ways and Means Committee is especially important: It gives New York two seats on the tax-writing panel that would be a key player in any reforms to Social Security and Medicare, the alternative minimum tax, and other domestic programs that are crucial to the city and state.
        Representative Charles B. Rangel of Harlem is the incoming chairman of Ways and Means, and he helped secure the seat for Mr. Crowley, who just won his fifth term in Congress and is the newly elected Democratic leader in Queens. It also seems to assure New York's continued presence on the panel when Mr. Rangel, who is 76, eventually leaves the House.
        In an interview yesterday, Mr. Crowley said he would try to limit the number of New Yorkers who have to pay the alternative minimum tax, which has taken a larger and larger bite out of the incomes of people in high-tax states like New York. He also said he would seek to aid New York hospitals at a time when many are being marked for closing, and would oppose any overhaul of Social Security or Medicare that would diminish benefits for the elderly, who make up a large voter bloc in his district.
        Mr. Crowley also said he was not an alarmist about the financial solvency of Social Security.
        ''I think it's a problem that has to be dealt with, but it's also still a ways off,'' he said, noting that he has been hesitant about supporting a system that allocates Social Security benefits according to one's means. ''The reality is,'' he added, ''some of these issues we have to grapple with sooner rather than later.''
        Mr. Crowley said he owed his seat to Mr. Rangel and to the incoming House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, with whom he has had some turbulent relations in the past; he backed Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, the incoming majority leader, while Ms. Pelosi had favored John P. Murtha of Pennsylvania for that post.
        Mr. Weiner, who represents Brooklyn and Queens, won a seat on another key panel, Energy and Commerce, which helps set policy on Medicaid, telecommunications and other issues important to New York.
        Mr. Weiner was a candidate for mayor of New York City in 2005 and finished a surprisingly strong second in a four-person Democratic primary. Political analysts see him as a potential contender in 2009, when Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's second term ends, but Mr. Weiner has been mum about his intentions.
        The four new members of Congress from New York also received committee assignments yesterday.
        Kirsten Gillibrand will join the House Armed Services Committee (a seat that mirrors one held in the Senate by Hillary Rodham Clinton, who has become a role model of sorts for Ms. Gillibrand). Yvette D. Clarke was assigned to the Homeland Security Committee, and Michael A. Arcuri and John Hall were given seats on the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee.
      