
        The New York Times has named two deputy editorial page editors, including one who will oversee the editorial page's presence online.
        The appointments, which will be effective Jan. 7, were announced yesterday by Andrew Rosenthal, the current deputy. Mr. Rosenthal will succeed Gail Collins as editorial page editor on Jan. 1, when she steps down. Ms. Collins is taking a leave of absence to write a book and plans to return in July as a columnist on the Op-Ed page.
        One new deputy, Carla Anne Robbins, who joined The Times in July as an editorial board member and an assistant editorial page editor, will work with Mr. Rosenthal to lead the editorial board. She will also oversee the letters-to-the-editor section and the production staff of the editorial page.
        The other new deputy, David Shipley, who is now editor of the Op-Ed page, will focus on expanding and enhancing the editorial page's presence online, a new position, the newspaper said. He will keep his duties as Op-Ed page editor.
        Mr. Rosenthal also announced that Adam Cohen, an assistant editorial page editor, will take on added responsibilities, including a special focus on the editorial board's coverage of New York regional issues and national politics.
        ''These appointments will better position us for the future as we continue to innovate our opinion report and expand our coverage in the digital world,'' Mr. Rosenthal said.
        Before joining The Times, Ms. Robbins, 53, had worked since 1993 as both a reporter and an editor for The Wall Street Journal, covering foreign policy and national security. In 1999 and 2000, she was a member of teams that won Pulitzer Prizes. Ms. Robbins has also worked for U.S. News & World Report and Business Week.
        Mr. Shipley, 43, has been the Op-Ed editor of The Times since 2003. Before that, he had served in numerous roles at the paper including national enterprise editor and a senior editor at The Times Magazine. From 1995 to 1997, Mr. Shipley was a speechwriter and special assistant to President Bill Clinton. From 1993 to 1995, he was the executive editor of The New Republic. He first joined The Times in 1990 as an assigning editor for the Op-Ed page.
      