
        The head of the United Nations inquiry into the assassination of Rafik Hariri, the former prime minister of Lebanon, said Tuesday that his investigation had reached a ''sensitive and complicated phase,'' but that he could not discuss it for fear of endangering investigators and witnesses.
        The official, Serge Brammertz, also said the breakdown of security in Beirut had made witnesses reticent and undermined his ability to recruit and retain staff members.
        As he delivered his report to the Security Council, antigovernment protesters were spending their 12th day camped out in central Beirut, in a campaign they said was intended to bring down the anti-Syrian government of Prime Minister Fouad Siniora.
        Government leaders have charged that the protesters' real aim was to derail plans for an international tribunal where Mr. Brammertz could try the killers of Mr. Hariri, a Lebanese politician opposed to Syrian domination of his country.
        Mr. Hariri was killed along with 22 others in February 2005, when a bomb exploded as his motorcade was moving along a downtown Beirut street. Public outrage and mass street demonstrations after the killings forced Syria to give in to a Security Council demand that it withdraw its troops from Lebanon after a 29-year presence in the country.
        Reports last year from the commission, when it was led by Mr. Brammertz's predecessor, Detlev Mehlis of Germany, implicated high-level Syrian intelligence officials in the assassination and accused Syria of obstructing the investigation.
        But the report from Mr. Brammertz, a Belgian on leave as deputy prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, said that Syria had been providing ''generally satisfactory'' cooperation and had complied with the commission's requests for information and assistance in a ''timely and efficient'' manner.
        He said new evidence supported his earlier conclusion that the operation had been a highly sophisticated one conducted by people who demonstrated ''a high degree of security-aware behavior'' to hide their identity and purpose.
        Working from fragmented remains and a tooth of the suspect, investigators determined that the suicide bomber was probably not Lebanese but had been in the country in the months preceding the attack.
        The commission said it had also found ''significant links'' between the Hariri killing and 14 other political assassinations in Lebanon that the Security Council in June asked it to review. Mr. Brammertz said the commission had also given technical assistance in the investigation of the killing of Pierre Gemayel, the Lebanese minister for industry. He was killed Nov. 21 in downtown Beirut by gunmen who leapt out of a vehicle, opened his car and fired 49 shots at close range.
      