
        In a major setback to the Bush administration's biodefense efforts, the government announced Tuesday that it had canceled an order for 75 million doses of a new anthrax vaccine, the single biggest purchase planned for the nation's antiterror drug stockpile.
        Since VaxGen of Brisbane, Calif., won the contract two years ago, skeptics have questioned the ability of the company, a small biotechnology business, to deliver on such a large order, as well as the administration's capacity to properly manage the overall $5.6 billion program, known as BioShield.
        VaxGen, which has no other major customers and has never made a successful vaccine or drug, was supposed to deliver enough vaccine to inoculate 25 million Americans after an anthrax attack, each with three doses.
        Officials at the Department of Health and Human Services terminated the $877 million contract Tuesday after VaxGen failed to start required clinical trials, a delay caused by troubles with the vaccine formula.
        ''With any type of scientific endeavor or research, it is always an unpredictable path that you will follow,'' said Bill Hall, a department spokesman.
        VaxGen's genetically engineered vaccine was selected because it was expected to produce fewer side effects and was effective with fewer doses than the only alternative, a 1950s-era vaccine now manufactured by Emergent BioSolutions of Rockville, Md.
        A modern anthrax vaccine had been under development for a decade by Army scientists, before VaxGen won its contract after lining up a licensing agreement with the military researchers.
        ''This is a great disappointment and a very real setback,'' said D. A. Henderson, the former director of the Department of Health and Human Services office that helped create the BioShield program.
        By the end of this year, VaxGen was supposed to have delivered its first 25 million doses to the stockpile. But as it was testing the vaccine, the company noticed that it was breaking down too quickly, apparently because of an unexpected interaction with an additive intended to bolster the vaccine's effectiveness, said Lance Ignon, a company spokesman.
        The Department of Health and Human Services, under pressure from Congress to reduce the risk of relying on a single company, has separately bought nine million doses of the Emergent BioSolutions vaccine, which has been widely used by the military since 1998 to inoculate more than 1.5 million members of the military. The mandatory vaccinations led to lawsuits and complaints of serious side effects.
        Mr. Hall said the Department of Health and Human Services was committed to finding a manufacturer to develop the modern version of the vaccine. But he said he could not predict how long that would take.
        The vaccine is not the nation's only defense against an anthrax attack. The department has also bought enough antibiotics to treat about 40 million Americans, in the event that multiple cities are struck at once. The recommended treatment after confirmed exposure to anthrax is a combination of a vaccine and antibiotics because anthrax spores are so hardy they can outlive the 60-day antibiotic course and still possibly threaten an exposed person.
        VaxGen's future is now in jeopardy, as the company was entitled to no compensation until it began to make deliveries to the stockpile. The company, which has about 230 employees, has invested more than $150 million on the project, Mr. Ignon said.
        This is the second high-profile failure for VaxGen. The 11-year-old company's planned AIDS vaccine was abandoned in 2003 after it proved ineffective.
        Project BioShield was created in July 2004 by an act of Congress at the request of the president. It was supposed to greatly expand the nation's stockpile of a variety of drugs and vaccines to protect against a biological, nuclear or chemical attack. But progress has been slow, in part because large pharmaceutical companies have shied from the venture and the government has taken a long time to decide what it wants.
      