
        It was a frigid night in January 2005, when Kimberly Bishop decided to quit her top-level position at the First Data Corporation, a global electronic commerce and payment company in Omaha. She had no specific plans, no job or family hovering in the wings. All she knew was that she had lived in Nebraska her entire 37 years, had been with First Data for 16 of them, and was ready for a change. Never mind that she was an executive vice president, the youngest member of the leadership team and responsible for a $2 billion business.
        ''I wanted to work for a company where I played a role in the growth of the business; I wanted to be located in a community I thought I would enjoy; and I wanted to work at a place where I felt I could make an impact,'' Ms. Bishop, now 39, said. ''I knew I'd find the right opportunity.''
        As it happened, the right opportunity found her. Soon after she left First Data, she got a call from Charles Wardell, the managing director for Korn/Ferry International, the executive search and leadership development firm in New York. He had been eyeing Ms. Bishop for a while and heard she was free, she recalled. He offered her a position with his firm -- in Manhattan. Was she up for a move?
        It took about 30 seconds for her reply: Why, yes, she was.
        Within days, she had closed up her house, packed a suitcase, logged on to Expedia.com and booked one month at an extended-stay hotel until she found an apartment. She said she felt both elated and petrified.
        ''I was leaving behind an industry, a community and a position that I knew inside and out,'' said Ms. Bishop, now a senior partner at Korn/Ferry. ''I was coming to New York alone, I was almost 40. It was a combination of exciting and terrifying.''
        ''A lot of people didn't understand why I would want to make such big changes with work, location, making new friends,'' she added. ''I just followed my instincts that this was the best thing for me.''
        For years, the baby boomers and retired workers have been embracing second (or third) careers, but the midcareer shift is just as prevalent among those under 40, career counselors say.
        ''Midcareer workers -- those 35 to 54 -- are most likely to feel dead-ended and the most likely to feel they've got too much on their plates at work,'' said Robert Morison, director for research at the Concours Group, a research, education and consulting firm in Kingwood, Tex.
        The Bureau of Labor Statistics has never tried to estimate the number of times people change careers in the course of their working lives because no consensus can be reached on what constitutes a career change. Still, a bureau report examined the number of jobs that people born in the years 1957 to 1964 held from age 18 to age 36. The people in this group held an average of 9.6 jobs from ages 18 to 36. (In this report, a job is defined as an uninterrupted period of work with a particular employer.)
        Brian Kurth, the founder of VocationVacation, a company based in Portland, Ore., that gives people the chance to test-drive new careers, says that 40 percent of his clients are under 40.
        ''They're disgruntled -- they got their law degree, their M.B.A., they're making plenty of money and they're dissatisfied,'' said Mr. Kurth, 40, who is on his fourth career. ''People are saying you only live once, why be miserable?''
        Liz Bywater, president of her own organizational consulting firm in Philadelphia, said, ''Today's workers are increasingly looking to find their passion, and they're not content to simply bring home a paycheck.''
        Ms. Bywater and other career specialists say the Internet is partly responsible for the job fluidity. Technology has allowed people to telecommute, so they are no longer beholden to an office the way their parents were. What's more, having witnessed or participated in the dot-com revolution, the midcareer workers know that risk-taking is always an option, and that failing is O.K. (It's even kind of cool, if you do it right.) But most important, they refuse to spend their lives stuck in a career that does not mean anything to them.
        ''There's a growing sense in the U.S. that our destiny is our own, that we create our own paths in life,'' said Alan Bernstein, co-author of ''Your Retirement, Your Way'' (McGraw-Hill, 2006). ''This has loosened the idea that people should do what they are best at, what they most enjoy, rather than what they've been trained to do.'' (The writer Joseph Campbell summed it up with his famous ''follow your bliss'' line. The only difference now is that people want to have their bliss and make money, too).
        Jen Zankan, 30, a former civil litigation lawyer in Los Angeles, spent four years practicing law when she realized that she cared about fashion and beauty more than torts. In August 2004, she quit the firm and apprenticed -- sans paycheck -- at a lifestyle public relations company.
        ''When I first told my father, he was so mad,'' she said. ''Law you understand -- it's prestigious, you have a steady career. But I owned a home. He was afraid if it didn't work out I'd be in a bad situation because I had a mortgage payment.'' She followed her bliss, anyway, opening Jeneration PR in March 2005. Now, she said, her father ''raves.''
        Lisa A. Mainiero, a professor of management at Fairfield University in Connecticut, said: ''People are saying, I want a career that's consistent with my values. It's socially acceptable to say that, whereas 10 years ago it wasn't.''
        In ''The Opt-Out Revolt: Why People Are Leaving Companies to Create Kaleidoscope Careers'' (Davies-Black Publishing, 2006), Ms. Mainiero and the co-author Sherry Sullivan surveyed more than 3,000 professionals and executives over five years to find out how they felt about their careers. Everyone, especially those under 40, sought authenticity, balance and challenge in their lives and careers. The authors also found that men and women were looking to share domestic responsibilities, nurture their own passions by taking on different pursuits and look for work that offered ''value and an authentic living.''
        ''They're saying, 'I want it all now,' '' Ms. Mainiero said.
        Sometimes couples change careers in tandem. For six years, Scott and Stacey Maness of Dallas ran three General Nutrition Centers that were owned by Ms. Maness's father. After their daughter, Lauren, was born in 1997, they found it increasingly difficult to juggle everything. They looked into child care but were not happy with their findings.
        In 1999, Ms. Maness found out she was pregnant with twin girls. Knowing that chasing after three children and running a business was no longer viable, the Manesses began thinking about opening a child care center of their own. They decided on Primrose Schools, a national franchise of preschools.
        ''It was very scary,'' Mr. Maness, now 36, said. While the couple knew how to manage the business aspects, they knew nothing about running a school. And the financial pressure was huge. ''We had to make it a success or we wouldn't have had anything left,'' he said. ''There was no room for failure.''
        Somehow, they managed: Today, 180 students attend their school, and in 2002 they bought a second one in a Dallas suburb. (That same year Mrs. Maness, 36, realized child care was not her passion. So she opened up a day spa and now works there full time.)
        Ms. Bishop, for her part, loves her job. And she loves living in New York City.
        Within days of moving to Manhattan, she said she became entrenched in itsculture, both professionally and personally. She learned to take the subway, hail cabs and order her favorite sandwich at her neighborhood deli. She also networked relentlessly, joining numerous boards and volunteering and mentoring at places like the Bottomless Closet, which helps lower-income women who are re-entering the work force.
        New Yorkers, she found, were welcoming. During her first month in town, a group of women held a cocktail party in her honor. Another friend introduced her to Ira Milstein, managing partner of the law firm of Weil, Gotshal & Manges and senior associate dean for corporate governance at the Yale School of Management. He was someone she had long admired -- she has spent much of her career studying leadership -- and she was delighted to finally meet him. ''Here I am talking about leadership and corporate governance with this guru,'' she said. ''I couldn't believe it.''
        Another friend gave her a list of doctors, dry cleaners, hair salons and seamstresses. They even set her up on a blind date with an oncologist; they've been together more than a year.
        ''My friends always kid me: The girl from Nebraska shows up and meets one of the few single doctors in New York,'' she said.
        Of course, it was not all easy. A pipe burst in her apartment building, and she had to find a new place, which is less than pleasant in New York. It took almost a year to sell her home in Nebraska. And she is still mastering public transportation (more than once she has unintentionally ended up in boroughs other than Manhattan).
        Still, the rewards clearly outweigh the pitfalls, she said, and she would tell anyone thinking about switching gears to just get up and do it.
        ''Sometimes,'' she said, ''risks pay off.''
        YOUR MONEY
      