
        Royal Dutch Shell offered on Monday to sell a stake in its $20 billion Sakhalin Island project to Gazprom, in a capitulation to the Kremlin's campaign to tighten control over the oil industry. Shell's chief executive, Jeroen van der Veer, made the offer after months of pressure by Russia's environmental regulators, who threatened to freeze work on Sakhalin 2 by revoking critical operating permits.
        Gazprom said in a statement Monday that it would study Shell's new offer. Analysts said a deal could come as early as the end of the month.
        Sakhalin 2, owned 55 percent by Shell, 25 percent by Mitsubishi and 20 percent by Mitsui, has five large components: two offshore platforms, pipelines and the world's largest liquefied natural gas plant.
        Asian nations on the hunt for energy supplies are seeking liquefied gas from the project. Gas from the Sakhalin 2 operation has already been sold through future supply contracts to Japan, South Korea and China.
        Gazprom already has a monopoly on Russian gas supplies to Europe and wants the same in Asia and it refuses to be undercut by any independent operator of Sakhalin 2.
        A Shell spokesman, Maksim Shoob, confirmed that Mr. van der Veer met Friday with Gazprom's chief executive, Aleksei B. Miller. He said the talks were ''quite positive and very constructive'' but offered no details.
        Gazprom characterized the meeting as Mr. van der Veer's making a ''series of offers concerning Sakhalin 2.''
        Gazprom and Shell have been in talks since July 2005, over the sale of a stake worth 25 percent plus one share of Sakhalin 2. But talks stalled after Shell doubled its cost estimates for Sakhalin 2 to $20 billion, citing higher prices for steel and an appreciation of the ruble.
        Gazprom also demanded some measure of control in Sakhalin 2, which is one of the Anglo-Dutch company's prized assets.
        Shell had resisted Gazprom's efforts to win a veto on the board of Sakhalin Energy, the operating company. That would have given Gazprom a voice in decisions about markets, pricing and strategy. Under a previous charter for the company, the 25 percent stake plus one share would have given Gazprom a say in these decisions.
        But days before the deal was initialed last year, Shell and its Japanese partners changed the charter, raising the percentage of stock required for a veto, according to lawyers familiar with the deal.
        In September this year, with these talks at a dead end, a Russian environmental watchdog, Rosprirodnadzor, accused Sakhalin Energy of damaging salmon streams and dumping dredge spoils in a Sakhalin Island bay and it threatened to freeze work.
        In a widening campaign of pressure, Russian environmental authorities also threatened projects run by Exxon Mobil, BP and Total.
        Under the new terms, Shell agreed to give Gazprom veto power, according to a lawyer who has seen a draft of the offer presented by Shell. ''They will reverse what they've done, or offer some other form of control,'' according to the lawyer, who insisted on anonymity because he was not authorized to speak publicly.
        Shell also offered a mechanism to ensure Gazprom against future cost overruns, according to an emerging markets risk consultant who advised one of the parties on the proposed deal and thus requested anonymity. Under this provision, future cost overruns might allow Gazprom to exercise an option to buy an even larger stake at a prearranged price, he said.
        These concessions could open the door for a larger role for the Russian company in the future. Spokesmen for both companies declined to discuss details.
        ''It appears at this point that Gazprom is a winner,'' James R. Fenkner, managing partner at Red Star, said in a telephone interview.
        Chris Weafer, chief analyst at Alfa Bank, said Gazprom would probably seek to increase its stake later by buying from the Japanese partners. ''The blocking stake is the first step,'' he said. ''The end game is 51 percent control.''
        Vitaly Y. Yermakov, research director for Russian and Caspian energy at Cambridge Energy Research Associates, said Shell was not being squeezed out entirely. ''If you compare something with zero, something is always better. They would have zero if this project were frozen.''
      