
        It looks as if Jeff Garcia will never entirely shake the underdog label. A diminutive quarterback who has made a career out of proving people wrong, he is on the verge of doing it again.
        Garcia played for a tiny college in his hometown, Gilroy, Calif. -- best known for its annual garlic festival -- before moving up the highway to San Jose State. He set team passing records there, then went to the Canadian Football League, where he won a Grey Cup championship with the Calgary Stampeders in 1998.
        The San Francisco 49ers lured him close to home again, and he was soon asked to do nothing more than replace Steve Young. Garcia made the Pro Bowl three years in a row. A career highlight was a furious playoff comeback victory against the Giants in January 2003.
        Then, Garcia seemed to disappear amid the breakup of the 49ers. He was a quarterback in exile, first in Cleveland, then in Detroit. The most notable statement he made was when he felt compelled to announce his heterosexuality after it was questioned by Terrell Owens, Garcia's former 49ers teammate.
        Garcia, 36, has re-emerged, coming again from nowhere -- not from Gavilan College or Alberta or Owens's hit list, but from the bench of the Philadelphia Eagles. And in a career of surprises, the biggest would be in leading a full rescue of the 7-6 Eagles, who play the 7-6 Giants on Sunday in a game laced with playoff implications.
        ''I don't know how many years I have left to play,'' Garcia said during a conference call with reporters Wednesday. ''And this is a great opportunity for me to show that I still am capable of playing the game at a high level, to be a part of something special.''
        The Eagles signed Garcia in the off-season. It was a comfortable fit. Philadelphia uses a version of the West Coast offense nearly identical to that which Garcia played in San Francisco and Detroit. The Eagles' offensive coordinator, Marty Mornhinweg, held the same position in San Francisco when Garcia was there.
        Philadelphia's starter, Donovan McNabb, hurt his right knee Nov. 19, and the Eagles, who opened the season 4-1, were on their way to losing five of their next six games. The season looked to be a facsimile of 2005, when injuries to McNabb helped lead to a 6-10 record.
        Garcia, listed generously at 6 feet 1 inch and 200 pounds, was not seen as any sort of season savior. Not that he has ever been one.
        ''I think it's just something that I'm used to,'' Garcia said. ''I'm used to being in the underdog position. I'm used to being in a position where people doubt my own abilities and doubt what I can bring to the field.''
        Again, the doubts are washing away. The Eagles lost Garcia's first start, to Indianapolis, but have won the past two. Garcia, at his hyperactive best, rolling out and throwing sharp, short passes, has thrown for eight touchdowns and no interceptions. His passer rating the past three games is 113.7. Only one quarterback, Drew Brees of the New Orleans Saints, has a season-long rating better than 100.
        The Giants, in paying the ultimate compliment, said that the Eagles were not doing anything differently with Garcia than they did with McNabb. Garcia has closed the usual gap between first string and second string.
        Giants Coach Tom Coughlin said, ''When you watch this team and the way they are performing right now, it would be hard to call this guy a backup quarterback.''
        But it is easy to call him an underdog.
        EXTRA POINTS
        Defensive end Michael Strahan (sprained foot) was still listed as doubtful on the injury report, but his availability may be a game-day decision. Strahan, who has missed five games, did some drills for the third day in a row, though he did not participate in teamwide work. Tom Coughlin called it ''progress.'' Asked if he expected Strahan to test his availability on the field before Sunday's game, Coughlin said: ''I don't know that. We haven't decided that.'' But he acknowledged the difference Strahan could make, if and when he receives medical clearance. ''There isn't any question that when we get this thing licked and he's ready to go, it will be a big lift for our team,'' he said. Strahan, in the locker room, would not comment.  Center Shaun O'Hara (sprained ankle) did not practice all week but was listed as questionable.
        PRO FOOTBALL
      