
        Two Palestinian security force members were killed during fighting among Palestinians in the Gaza Strip early Wednesday, and Israeli troops in the West Bank shot dead two Palestinian militants.
        Despite these clashes, a renewed Palestinian effort to end the bloodshed in Gaza kept most gunmen off the street on Wednesday and brought at least a brief respite after more than a week of often intense fighting between the main factions, Hamas and Fatah.
        In Gaza City, Palestinian policemen were at their posts, cars filled the streets, and shops that closed Tuesday during gun battles reopened Wednesday. However, schools remained closed and Gazans said they were not sure whether the relative calm would hold.
        Hamas and Fatah remained deadlocked politically. The Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas of Fatah, has said that talks on a national unity government are stalled. He said Saturday that he wanted to hold new elections, while Hamas, the militant Islamic group that controls most of the government, opposes such a plan.
        On Wednesday, Mr. Abbas said at a news conference in the West Bank city of Ramallah: ''We are not opposed to a new round of dialogue. We want that these efforts succeed.''
        The Palestinian prime minister, Ismail Haniya of Hamas, says he still supports negotiations for a unity government, though months of talks between Hamas and Fatah have failed to produce an agreement.
        In Israel, Prime Minister Ehud Olmert said he hoped that the Palestinian truce would hold.
        ''We are not happy about the developments in the Palestinian Authority,'' Mr. Olmert said. ''Mutual violence between Fatah and Hamas is not something we are happy to see. We definitely would be happy to see a cease-fire.''
        A Palestinian cease-fire declared Sunday night immediately collapsed, but security chiefs from Hamas and Fatah announced another truce on Tuesday night. A few hours later, members of a security agency aligned with Fatah, Preventive Security, waged a shootout for several hours with Hamas gunmen in Gaza City, and two of the security force officers were killed, Fatah said.
        During a funeral procession for the two men later on Wednesday, some gunmen fired into the air and several cars were set alight, but no casualties were reported.
        In the West Bank on Wednesday, Israeli troops shot dead two militants from the Islamic Jihad faction when a gun battle broke out as the forces tried to arrest them, Israeli security officials said.
        In another development on Wednesday, Palestinian militants in northern Gaza fired seven rockets toward southern Israel, though no injuries or serious damage were reported, the Israeli military said. The Palestinians have fired almost 40 rockets at Israel since a cease-fire was declared Nov. 26.
      