
        As regulators wage war on unhealthy diets, cholesterol in food is increasingly unpopular. But it may have found a new role in advertising.
        An Israeli company, Magink Display Technologies, has developed a billboard that uses a type of synthetically produced cholesterol to help display digital images. When electrical impulses are applied to the material, which is in a thin layer beneath a transparent screen, its molecules change shape and size, forming full-color images.
        JCDecaux, an outdoor advertising company based in France, tested the billboards during the Cannes International Film Festival last spring, and they are getting a longer look in London, where the billboard division of Clear Channel Communications has set up eight screens.
        Under a new agreement, American introduction of the Magink technology is planned by Lamar Outdoor Advertising, a billboard operator with corporate headquarters in Baton Rouge, La. Lamar plans to set up an unspecified number of Magink billboards in the United States, starting in the second half of 2007.
        This technology is one of a number of ways outdoor advertising companies are trying to adapt the old-fashioned billboard for the digital era. By replacing paper and paste with electronic screens, billboard companies can control advertising sites from an office computer, allowing advertisers to update them as they see fit.
        Magink says its technology is an improvement on existing electronic billboard technologies like the L.E.D., or light-emitting diode. L.E.D.'s produce giant, colorful electronic images, but they sometimes fade in strong sunlight.
        They also have a grainier picture than the Magink screens, which the company says offer high-resolution images that resemble paper rather than television screens.
        ''After a long period in which nothing changed in outdoor, this is unique,'' said Ran Poliakine, founder of Magink.
        Lamar has already installed hundreds of L.E.D. screens in a number of American states, but their use has been restricted by regulations governing traffic safety or visual pollution, said William Ripp, director of Lamar's digital division.
        Because the Magink screens give off less light, he said, ''they might be better received in terms of the legislative environment.''
        While lawmakers and regulators may prefer a less glaring image, some advertisers are skeptical.
        In London, Clear Channel has been operating Magink billboards for several months but is still trying to iron out problems with them, said Barry Sayer, chief executive of the British division of Clear Channel Outdoor. ''Advertiser support has been low,'' he said. ''It's a bit of an education process.''
        Clear Channel has made the billboards available free to advertisers like The Independent, Mr. Sayer said, but some potential clients want to see a brighter image before committing to running campaigns.
        He said the company was working on that problem with Magink and intended to have paying customers by early next year.
        Several low-cost airlines, attracted by the ability to change quoted fares throughout the day, have expressed interest, Mr. Sayer said.
        Another potential problem is the relatively small size of Magink screens, which are restricted for now to about 20 feet by 10 feet. In the United States, a typical billboard alongside a highway is 48 feet by 14 feet.
        Mr. Poliakine said Magink, which is privately held and based in a suburb of Jerusalem, is developing a larger billboard. The company has received expressions of interest in its technology from billboard operators in other markets, he said.
        While digital billboards are more expensive to install than the printed kind, the Magink screens cost less than half the roughly $25,000 price of an L.E.D.-based billboard, he said. They also cost less to run because they use only one-tenth the power of an L.E.D. screen, Mr. Poliakine said. Instead of emitting light, the technology uses light reflected from the sun, or an artificial source at night, to help create the images.
        ''We'd like to do our digital revolution as energy-conservatively as we can,'' Mr. Sayer said.
        TECHNOLOGY
        Correction:  December 27, 2006, Wednesday  The Advertising column on Dec. 18, about a new digital billboard technology from Magink, referred incorrectly to the price of the billboards. The cost, less than half the $25,000 of an L.E.D.-based billboard, reflects the price per square meter, not the overall cost.
      