
        A fourfold increase in the price of uranium in the past three years has led to a rush of new claims by uranium companies, according to a new survey by an environmental group that says it wants to inform the public of potentially harmful consequences.
        Mining claim data compiled by the Environmental Working Group, environmental research specialists based in Washington, along with raw data from the federal Bureau of Land Management, show that in Colorado, New Mexico, Utah and Wyoming total claims rose to about 18,000 in 2005 from just over 2,000 in 2001.
        In Arizona, a project manager for Quaterra Resources, a Canadian mining company, has filed 616 claims, many within a few miles of the Grand Canyon's north rim.
        ''There's a renaissance of people's attitudes toward nuclear energy as a viable green, clean, clean-air type of energy sources,'' said Paul Matysek, president of the Energy Metals Corporation, which is based in British Columbia. And, Mr. Matysek added, the increase in oil and natural-gas prices, though they have eased in recent months, has spurred a small boom in the price of the uranium.
        ''Three years ago it was $12 or $14'' a pound, he said. ''Today it's $65.50.''
        Mr. Matysek's company has signed a letter of intent to merge with High Plains Uranium Inc., a company that was formed in New Brunswick, Canada, less than two years ago. High Plains, with headquarters in Cheyenne, Wyo., has filed more than 2,250 claims.
        Celia Boddington, a spokeswoman for the Bureau of Land Management, said, ''What's driving this is primarily the demand for energy.''
        Environmental groups said that, whatever is driving it, the consequences could be severe.
        ''A modern economy has to have mining, but where and how the mining takes place should be decided by citizens, not mining-company pressure,'' Dusty Horwitt, an analyst with the Environmental Working Group, said in an e-mail message.
        Mr. Horwitt added, ''When people see that uranium mines are going to be located near or upstream from them, we think they will demand more say-so over where mining goes on public property.''
        The uranium claims are clustered in places like the Lisbon and Crystal Valleys in eastern Utah, near Moab; areas of Arizona north of the Grand Canyon; and the Colorado Plateau in Colorado.
        But new mining claims of all kinds are scattered around the West, from the border areas where California meets Oregon to the entire state of Nevada, which is historically the state more associated with hard-rock mining than any other in the West.
        In Nevada, for instance, the environmental group's research found more than 166,000 new claims, covering more than 3.5 million acres of public land.
        An academic expert and a mining company executive agreed that only a tiny fraction of all claims -- usually less than a tenth of 1 percent -- are ever mined. But the scars of open-pit mining are visible in many places on the Environmental Working Group's Web site, which combined its data with the Google's mapping software.
        Still, said Mark Kuchta, an associate professor of mining engineering at the Colorado School of Mines, uranium mining in the future will have far less impact than the mines and the associated mills in the past.
        ''The environmental laws have changed,'' Mr. Kuchta said. ''In order to build the mine, there's a plethora of permits'' needed.
        He added, ''You can't just leave them on the surface and walk away the way you used to do.''
      