
        LIKE its neighbors, the narrow walk-ups that line the block of 78th Street east of Second Avenue, Orwasher's bread bakery is a study in the economical use of space. That is why watching the weekly delivery of flour to the bakery is so mesmerizing.
        According to Abram Orwasher, whose grandfather opened the bakery in 1916, an efficient way to have flour delivered is by a tanker truck. It can haul a large quantity of flour, which is sucked into the bakery through a vacuum tube and stored in an in-house silo.
        But Orwasher's, which has only about 600 square feet of retail space, does not have room for a silo. So it buys flour by the bag, and as a result the bakery's routines are bound by a delivery of bagged flour around 9 a.m. every Tuesday, when the curb is cleared for street cleaning.
        The intricate flour-delivery ballet on display one recent Tuesday began with the appearance of Jonathas DaSilva, who is a driver for Fodera Foods, a Queens bakery supply company. Mr. DaSilva positioned himself at the open bay of a large delivery truck that he had parked near the curb. In the belly of the truck, Victor Artiga, another Fodera employee, ripped plastic wrapping from a pallet stacked high with 100-pound sacks that bore labels like ''Progressive Baker Fancy First Clear.''
        Pulling down the top sack, Mr. Artiga stood it right side up, skidded it to the edge of the truck's inside and flipped it onto Mr. DaSilva's shoulder, where it landed with a floury puff.
        Bag atop his shoulder, Mr. DaSilva went to an open cellar door in the sidewalk, where he hefted the bag over the lip of the entrance. It slid down an ancient wooden plank into the basement, where a third man was poised to catch the hurtling sacks and restack them. Long before all the sacks had made their way to the basement, the right side of Mr. DaSilva's black T-shirt had turned a little gray.
        The delivery, which takes about an hour, is an integral part of the bakery's rhythms, which are stilled for only a few hours each week. Overnight, long after the last customer has trudged off with fresh challah under one arm, the retail space is used to stage wholesale operations: slicers and packers busy themselves preparing deliveries for the next day.
        Earlier in the evening, their places are held by the bakers, in the basement of Orwasher's. Twelve hours before the flour truck rumbles up, shapers can be seen throwing raw loaves onto a long maple workbench with a smack. Four-hundred-pound slabs of dough sit in metal tubs near the mixers from which they have emerged, looking like nothing so much as the remains of a tea party in a giant's kitchen.
        LAUREN C. PORCARO
        Urban Studies | Stocking Up
      