
        With Allen Iverson gone and the team off to a terrible start, the season does not look bright for the Philadelphia 76ers. But with three first-round draft picks in 2007, two of them coming from the Iverson trade, the Sixers will wade into an N.B.A. draft potentially so deep it could yield the building blocks for a quick turnaround.
        Next year's class of potential incoming talent is considered among the best in years largely because players were not allowed to jump to the N.B.A. out of high school after last season. Instead, under new N.B.A. rules, they are not eligible until one year after leaving high school.
        ''Everybody is saying this may be the best draft in decades,'' said Marty Blake, the N.B.A. director of scouting. ''If you look at the players likely to be coming out this year, there is a lot of talent, including four or five kids who would have come out last year out of high school if they didn't change the rules. You can rebuild with a draft like this, as long as you have patience and a coach who will play rookies.''
        Iverson was traded Tuesday to the Denver Nuggets for Andre Miller, Joe Smith and two first-round draft picks in 2007, Denver's own pick and one the Nuggets acquired from Dallas. The 76ers' own selection will no doubt be a lottery pick, while the Denver and Dallas selections figure to come somewhere in the second half of the first round.
        ''I think the draft picks are really important,'' said Billy King, the Sixers' president, at a news conference Tuesday to announce the Iverson trade. ''We want to build through the draft, and through our young players, and have cap flexibility. So all of that was very important.''
        The Sixers, who entered last night's game against the Indiana Pacers with a 5-18 record and figure to struggle even more without Iverson's 31.2 points a game, are in the running to finish with the worst record in the N.B.A. Under the league's lottery system, that would give them a 25 percent chance of picking first in a draft that is likely to be headed by the Ohio State freshman Greg Oden, a 7-foot center who is averaging 15.5 points and 8.5 rebounds a game for the No. 3 Buckeyes.
        Oden is among a talented group of college freshman that could include a number of lottery picks. The list includes Texas' Kevin Durant, North Carolina's Brandan Wright and Arizona's Chase Budinger. Other top picks could include the Florida junior Joakim Noah and his teammate, the junior Al Horford. Both made the increasingly unusual move of staying in college despite successful sophomore seasons that included an N.C.A.A. championship.
        But the Iverson trade will eventually be judged not on who the Sixers get with their own pick, but who they select with the picks acquired from the Nuggets -- that is, if King does not deal them for established players. But even some of the players projected to go with picks in the middle to latter parts of the first round could be the type who make an immediate impact.
        Noteworthy players who may still be available midway through the first round include Nevada's Nick Fazekas, the North Carolina sophomore Tyler Hansbrough, Pittsburgh center Aaron Gray, Louisiana State's Glen Davis and the international stars Tiago Splitter from Brazil and Yi Jianlian from China.
        But one N.B.A. scout, who was granted anonymity because he is not authorized to speak publicly, said a lot could change between now and the draft.
        ''It's hard to say what the Sixers might come up with because we have no idea who's going to be in the draft,'' the scout said. ''It's all conjecture right now. What if Greg Oden stays in school? He probably won't, but what if he does? What if Brandan Wright stays at Carolina? And I don't know what Europeans are going to be in the draft. The draft can look one way in September, a different way in December and completely different still by the time the draft comes around.''
        One certainty is that the 76ers will have plenty of holes to fill. Having acquired Miller in the Iverson deal, they are set at point guard, but little else. They primarily need scorers and talented big men.
        BASKETBALL
      