
        The number of Connecticut residents struggling to pay their electric bills is nearing record levels, and with recent utility rate increases, groups that help low-income families pay their utility bills say they will have trouble keeping up with demand.
        Connecticut Light and Power, the state's largest utility, with nearly 1.2 million customers, has sent 33,209 shut-off notices through October. It sent 31,520 notices over the same period in 2005, and a record 34,446 for the entire year.
        The state Department of Public Utility Control granted C.L.&P. a rate increase of 7.7 percent, which takes effect Jan. 1, despite a last-minute request by Gov. M. Jodi Rell to postpone it. Under the new rate, the average residential customer will pay about $8 more a month.
        The state's second-largest utility, United Illuminating, which says it serves about 320,000 residents in the New Haven-Bridgeport area, is seeking a rate increase of 38 percent. State law allows people who are unable to pay their electric bills to seek protection from having their power shut off from Nov. 1 to April 15. But the program is not automatic, and customers must qualify. Advocates for low-income families say the increases will make things worse for poor people. Residential electricity rates in the state are already among the highest in the country.
        ''This is going to be sort of a way of life for low-income families in the state,'' said Patricia Wrice, executive director of Operation Fuel, which provides energy assistance for lower-income families. ''They'll have electricity and gas on from November to May and be without it all summer long, with no way of ever getting out from under. That is the problem that really needs to be addressed.''
        Last year, Operation Fuel distributed $850,000. This year, Ms. Wrice said the organization, which provides up to $400 per family, anticipates that it will need more than $1 million. In a recent report, Operation Fuel found that there was a $1,100 gap between what the average family of four earning less than $40,000 a year could afford to pay and what it owed.
        ''The magnitude of the problem is just greater than our resources,'' Ms. Wrice said.
        The utilities say the rate increases are needed to pay the rising cost of wholesale electricity. Under state deregulation laws, the state utilities deliver power purchased through a bidding process from suppliers.
        United Illuminating's rate increase would raise a bill of about $105 a month to about $145, and that has many people nervous, said Michael Sharpe, area coordinator for the Salvation Army of Greater Bridgeport. ''Demand for help is going to be high,'' he said.
        THE WEEK
      