
        In the last 12 months Roger Toussaint led 33,700 subway and bus workers on an illegal citywide strike, went to jail, saw his union fined $2.5 million and became both a labor hero and a mass transit villain.
        But yesterday, two days after winning re-election as union president with less than half the vote, he said he felt vindicated.
        Mr. Toussaint said he felt vindicated not only because he had won a new three-year term, but also because an arbitration panel ruled on Friday that the union should have essentially the same contract deal that it negotiated last December, a deal that the Metropolitan Transportation Authority had sought to walk away from.
        Praising the arbitration decision, Mr. Toussaint said: ''This is a victory on our part. The M.T.A. was trying to take value out of the contract.''
        But even as he was celebrating the election results and arbitration decision, Mr. Toussaint acknowledged that he faced two formidable challenges.
        After beating back four rivals in a bitterly fought election, Mr. Toussaint needs to unify his badly divided organization, Local 100 of the Transport Workers Union. And after leading last winter's 60-hour strike, he needs to find a way to finance his union's operations when it loses the automatic dues checkoff this summer, for at least three months, as punishment for its illegal walkout. Under the checkoff, the transportation authority helps the union by deducting $18 million a year in dues from the transit workers' paychecks.
        Mr. Toussaint said he hoped to persuade members to allow the union to deduct dues directly from their bank accounts.
        ''Our intention is to come out stronger as an organization,'' Mr. Toussaint said. ''We're going to use this to be driven more by one-on-one-contact with members.''
        Echoing the original deal, the three-person arbitration panel called for a 37-month contract with raises averaging 3.5 percent a year. The panel also ruled that the transit workers should pay 1.5 percent of their wages toward their health insurance premiums. Previously, the transit workers, like most New York City municipal workers, contributed nothing toward their premiums.
        The panel also called for reimbursing $130 million to some 20,000 transit workers who had contributed too much into their pension fund. The transportation authority had urged the arbitration panel to scrap that provision, which some editorial writers and politicians, including Gov. George E. Pataki, attacked as a reward for workers who had engaged in an illegal strike.
        Charles Brecher, the research director for the Citizens Budget Commission, a fiscal monitoring group backed by businesses, said the ruling was in ways a victory for the transportation authority. The arbitration decision is binding on the two sides and sets the terms of a new contract.
        ''It's a win for the M.T.A. and in certain ways for Mayor Bloomberg,'' Mr. Brecher said, ''because it includes a provision for the cost sharing on health premiums. That's a big change in labor relations in the public sector here.''
        Mr. Toussaint negotiated the tentative contract last December, days after the strike ended. But many members bristled at having to pay for health coverage, and in January, rejecting Mr. Toussaint's advice, the rank and file voted down the contract by 7 votes out of 22,461 cast.
        At that point, the transportation authority said the agreement was void. With the authority demanding more concessions, the transit workers ratified the deal in a revote in April, but the agency insisted on arbitration.
        David Gregory, a labor law expert at St. John's University, said, ''Toussaint is substantially vindicated by the arbitration, although it wasn't an effortless or a cost-free win.'' The costs include not only public anger from the strike but also a $2.5 million fine and the loss of the dues checkoff. Mr. Toussaint went to jail for 3 1/2 days for leading the walkout. And the workers themselves were penalized two days' pay for each day they were on strike.
        The union shut down the transit system after rejecting the transportation authority's demand for a major concession: that newly hired workers have a less generous pension plan than current workers. The union persuaded the authority to drop that demand, but in return the union agreed to another concession: the 1.5 percent contribution toward health premiums.
        ''It's a great contract,'' said John Goodwin, a bus driver interviewed yesterday at the Jackie Gleason Bus Depot in Brooklyn. The only problem, he said, was the contribution toward health insurance premiums.
        Defending the strike, he said: ''Sometimes you have to stick up for what you believe in. You've got to fight.''
        Carl Ponatkins, a fellow bus driver, said, ''Nobody wanted to strike, but we had to do it for respect.''
        But in retrospect, Dennis Payton, another bus driver, wondered what the strike accomplished. ''There's no way we should have gone on strike and come back and not have a contract,'' he said. ''We thought it was worth it then, but it ended up being a bunch of baloney.''
        Mr. Toussaint's supporters said it was impressive for him to obtain 45 percent in a five-person field. And in some ways his position will be strengthened because several of his most outspoken opponents will no longer be on the executive board.
        Barry Roberts, a union vice president who was the runner-up in the race for president, with 35 percent of the vote, said Mr. Toussaint needed to bring the union together. During the campaign, he asserted that Mr. Toussaint's style was to elbow aside those who disagree with him.
        ''I hope he opens his arms and welcomes everyone in,'' Mr. Roberts said. ''We need to do this together.''
        NEWS ANALYSIS
      