
        For MTV, a new association with a video game called Guitar Hero is opening a path back to that network's roots in music.
        But it doesn't mean there won't soon be some kind of reality television version of the hugely popular game.
        The second edition of Guitar Hero is one of the hottest-selling games this gift-giving season, with stores finding it hard to keep it in stock. Reviews have been largely ecstatic, and encomiums have been pouring in from real-life rock stars, including Trent Reznor of Nine Inch Nails to Jack Black of Tenacious D.
        Ed Robertson, the guitarist for Barenaked Ladies, said he was ''totally addicted to the game on our last tour.'' He played constantly, he said, by himself and in contests against crew members.
        It got so bad, Mr. Robertson said, that at one concert, ''I was just finishing up the expert level on a song when the band wrangler came in and said I had to go on stage right at that moment. I said, 'Wait man, I'm in the last solo of ''Free Bird.'' ' I went right from Guitar Hero to running up on stage to perform for real.''
        Mr. Robertson said that the game is now all but standard equipment on the tour buses of many rock bands. And Guitar Hero even played a role in this year's baseball playoffs.
        The Detroit Tigers got worried about the performance of their star reliever Joel Zumaya during the American League Championship Series when he was afflicted with wrist and forearm inflammation, until they learned it did not come from his pitching motion but from playing too many hours of Guitar Hero.
        The game, which is available on PlayStation 2, is the product of a company called Harmonix, which specializes in music-oriented video games. MTV executives became interested in acquiring the company this year after seeing how well the original version of Guitar Hero sold last holiday season, and after playing the game themselves.
        ''We were impressed with how they had cracked the code on the music game,'' said Van Toffler, the president of MTV's music group. ''They figured out a way to make the music gaming experience truly emotive, just like the experience of really playing music.'' MTV purchased Harmonix in September.
        In the game a player manipulates a toy model of a guitar that uses buttons rather than frets to produce notes, which are color coded on the screen to match the buttons. The music accompanies a rock song with the player simulating the experience of being onstage with the band. The player can move up from an easy level to tougher tests until he reaches the expert level, which takes a high degree of expertise.
        That Guitar Hero has appealed to real artists came as a bit of a surprise to the creators. Alex Rigopulos, the chief executive of Harmonix, said he expected it would appeal mainly to ''those of us who want to experience what it feels like to play rock music.''
        But he said, ''We started getting all this fan mail from real artists.''
        Partly, the game simply touched the competitive streak in a lot of musicians. Mr. Robertson said he had played against a ''really techy geek'' in a competition in Denver. ''And he beat me.'' That night Mr. Robertson invited his opponent to watch a Barenaked Ladies concert and he razzed him from the stage. ''I bet you can't come up here and try it with a real one,'' he said.
        Artists also simply enjoy the experience of playing someone else's music. Mr. Robertson said he was so excited to learn the Foo Fighters song ''Monkey Wrench'' that he went out and bought three of the band's CDs.
        For MTV the expanding popularity of the game is fueling all kinds of ideas for future applications. (One that already has emerged: The Guitar Hero wedding, with a competition at the reception.)
        Mr. Toffler said MTV is looking into ways to adapt the game into its television programming. One application that fits nicely is an inclusion of the game in the online ''virtual world'' MTV is building on shows like ''Laguna Beach.''
        Mr. Toffler said MTV would incorporate Guitar Hero into a virtual world accompanying its annual Video Music Awards, where the avatar (self-created character) of the computer user would play the game before entering the audience for the awards show.
        ''We have all kinds of ideas for expanding the experience into television shows,'' Mr. Toffler said.
        Mr. Robertson, who said he has enjoyed playing video games ''all the way back to Pong,'' said this one had done something extraordinary. ''It took a very simple idea and executed it perfectly,'' he said.
      