
        Yoko Ono's chauffeur was forced to remain in custody yesterday despite having put together $250,000 cash bail after federal officials issued an order to detain him because of questions about his immigration status.
        The chauffeur, Koral Karsan, 50, a Turkish immigrant, was arrested and jailed last week on charges of trying to extort $2 million from Ms. Ono, the widow of John Lennon.
        Mark Thorn, a spokesman for the federal office of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, said the agency had issued a ''detainer'' for Mr. Karsan. The order means, he said, that if Mr. Karsan were to be released, he would go directly into the custody of immigration officials.
        Mr. Thorn declined to discuss Mr. Karsan's immigration status, citing privacy considerations, but said that a detainer is generally issued because of an immigration status violation.
        Mr. Karsan's lawyer, Robert Gottlieb, said yesterday that Mr. Karsan came to the United States on a tourist visa in 1992 and obtained an L-1 work visa, as an executive in a Turkish import-export business, in November 1993. ''We know that he at least began the process of obtaining permanent resident status,'' Mr. Gottlieb said. ''I just cannot yet confirm his legal status as of today.''
        Mr. Gottlieb said he was trying to sort out his client's immigration status in time for a hearing today, in which the Manhattan district attorney is expected to announce whether a grand jury voted to indict the chauffeur.
        Mr. Gottlieb had hoped to have his client, who was arrested on Wednesday, released yesterday, after two supporters had put up $250,000 in cashier's checks for his bail. The district attorney's office was reviewing documentation Mr. Gottlieb provided to show that the money was obtained legitimately, but the federal detention order takes precedence over the bail.
        The supporters, whose names have not been disclosed, are ''legitimate, hard-working small business owners with spotless records,'' Mr. Gottlieb said. ''One of them I believe is Turkish, the other is not.''
      