
        For the well-dressed children and their harried parents arriving at the New York State Theater on Sunday afternoon, the moment had simply arrived to see George Balanchine's ''Nutcracker.'' But for the many dancers and fans in the New York City Ballet audience, the matinee was -- as one of them said -- a debut-o-rama.
        With its long run and benign audiences ''The Nutcracker'' provides an opportunity for the company to try out promising dancers in solo roles, and at this performance the Powers That Cast went all out: from Dr. and Frau Stahlbaum (the hosts of the Act 1 Christmas party) to the Sugarplum Fairy, almost every featured adult performer was new to his or her part.
        If this was a recipe for onstage nerves, it didn't show, other than in Ana Sophia Scheller's uncharacteristic diffidence during her first Sugarplum solo. Ms. Scheller is technically sure and usually exudes confidence, but in the crystalline dance that is the audience's introduction to the enchanted Konfituerenburg (the Act II Land of Sweets) she was clear and correct without the delicacy of musical phrasing or precise placement that are needed to create the illusion of a radiant, otherworldly creature.
        By the end of the act, however, Ms. Scheller had recovered her aplomb. In the final pas de deux that is the emotional culmination of the ballet, she grew visibly in elegant authority, holding lovely balances and clearly happy to be center stage. Tyler Angle, new to the role of the Sugarplum Fairy's Cavalier, was an attentive, careful partner, smoothing the way through tricky lifts, catches and turns, but he struggled a little with the technical demands of his solo section.
        In another role debut Kyle Froman gave a nicely eccentric reading of Herr Drosselmeier as a playful mad genius, fixing the broken Nutcracker toy with his finger (and wincing), then bowing with courtly grandeur to the sleeping Marie. And amid a flock of debuts in Act II's cameo parts, Masahiro Suehara, a School of American Ballet student, stood out for his clean, high-leaping performance as the lead Candy Cane.
        Dancing the principal role of Dewdrop for the first time, Sara Mearns gave an unaffected, expansive performance that made for an interesting contrast with the crisp attack more usual to this role. Ms. Mearns has a beautiful line -- the harmonious alignment of the limbs, torso and head that is so central to ballet -- a lush, flowing style and an unerring musicality. Dewdrop may not be the role she will be remembered for, but it's as good a showcase for her considerable talents as any.
        ''The Nutcracker'' continues through Dec. 30 at the New York State Theater, Lincoln Center, (212) 870-5570, nycballet.com.
        DANCE REVIEW
      