
        Readers of the Web version of The New York Times are being offered a rapidly expanding range of opportunities to interact with editors, reporters and other online users. And they are using it to question, criticize -- and, yes, praise -- the news staff to a degree never seen in the print paper.
        As the end of the year approaches, it seems like a good time to take a look at the kinds of exchanges taking place in a few of the major interactive features that The Times's Web site has introduced during 2006.
        The new Readers' Comments feature has quickly become a vital part of the online paper. Its link on a major story of the day takes readers to a related, and usually broad, question and a place to post their opinions, via a moderator who serves as a filter. Both the number of readers using this feature and the quality of their comments have impressed me.
        More than 900 comments were posted last week in response to the Dec. 11 question, ''Are Americans prepared to elect an African-American or a woman as president?'' An Oct. 18 question about whether Muslim women should dress ''more in keeping with the customs of the non-Muslim majority among whom they live'' drew 616 comments.
        A Times staff member moderates the opinions, and that may be playing a significant role in keeping the comments generally civil and frequently driven by ideas rather than ideology. Yet, in recent months, I have noticed occasional vulgarities in comments that I am rather sure would not be allowed in the printed paper.
        ''The default position is to publish unless it's abusive,'' Jonathan Landman, the deputy managing editor and the person responsible over all for The Times's online operation, told me in a September interview. What about some of the sniping among readers? ''That's the nature of the beast,'' he said.
        Several intriguing interactions in the Readers' Comments area have been spotted by Joseph Plambeck, my assistant, as he investigates issues raised with the public editor's office. One he saw last week appeared to be a first: a subject of a story contested a comment posted by a reader.
        The question linked to a Dec. 8 article about college students with mental illness asked if the schools should involve parents in the students' treatment. After a reader suggested that the colleges had no legal duty to care for such students, a young man named in the article responded in a letter with a link to the opinions section that he was ''disappointed by the ignorance'' he saw in the comment.
        Reporters are showing up on Readers' Comments to answer questions raised by their articles. In the wake of Andrew C. Revkin's Oct. 30 story about lagging research into new energy technologies, a reader, Albert D. Ullman, asked about using tidal power to generate electricity. ''Most of the energy experts I talked to,'' Mr. Revkin responded, ''said tidal power ultimately has inadequate scale to solve more than a small part of the energy challenge.''
        When Benedict Carey's article on children's mental disorders was posted online the evening before it appeared in the Nov. 11 print paper, the first comment from a reader arrived on Readers' Opinions at 11:27 p.m. Is there a problem with children learning that their being labeled with a disorder can get them attention? ''Kids can be very crafty (I know mine can be) and some may learn that the psychiatric labels get them attention,'' Mr. Carey responded. ''But my impression is that it would be a very small number.''
        Talk to the Newsroom, a feature launched in April, has allowed online readers to put questions to Bill Keller, the executive editor, and 16 other top editors so far. Every other week, an editor responds for a week to selected questions, and judging from what they have tackled, they do not seem to be ducking all the hard ones. Mr. Keller expansively answered 34 of the 850 questions that readers had for him when he led off last spring.
        Readers seem pleased with the access. When Jill Abramson, the managing editor for news, was taking questions last month, a reader prefaced his question with praise. ''This contact is a great feature offered by The New York Times for us general readers to at least have a chance to communicate with the editorial decision makers at The New York Times,'' Rob George wrote. ''Maybe not great for your workload, but kudos nonetheless!''
        The proliferation of Times blogs gives readers yet another window on the newsroom. When an October campaign story incorrectly reported how often Sen. Joseph I. Lieberman had said ''stay the course'' in relation to Iraq, complaints pelted The Empire Zone blog. The day the correction appeared, Patrick LaForge, a deputy metro editor, explained in a series of exchanges on the blog what had caused the error. ''Thank you for taking the time to read and respond to all of us,'' a Los Angeles reader wrote to Mr. LaForge in the afternoon. ''It's much appreciated.''
        There should be even greater reader interaction ahead. Mr. Landman told me in September that further interactive features are being contemplated. One possible feature he mentioned: allowing readers to comment on every story on the site, not just one major article a day.
        Could this major effort by the Web version of The Times, to offer users broader access to editors and reporters, eventually help address reader concerns about the paper's coverage? Maybe. We have been seeing indications during the year that the public editor's incoming tide of e-mail complaints may be slowing a bit. And we're delighted -- for all concerned.
        The Times Speaks for Itself
        There is at least one surprise I've found with my role as public editor at The Times: readers who choose to believe that I speak for the paper -- usually when it bolsters their personal agenda to do so.
        Therefore, I feel it's important to take a moment to emphasize the disclaimer that appears in the box to the left and on the public editor's Web pages. ''His opinions and conclusions are his own,'' it says of me. And the note at the bottom of each e-mail message or letter that I send to anyone is more emphatic: ''The public editor's opinions are his own and do not represent those of The New York Times.''
        A prime example was some of the reaction to my Oct. 22 mea culpa on the Swift banking data story. I acknowledged that I no longer agreed with the decision of Times editors to publish an article about a secret Bush administration banking-data surveillance program. ''So the NYT finally admits they were wrong in the so-called secret banking data 'scandal,''' a reader wrote gloatingly in an e-mail message the next day, one of many in the same vein.
        But the publisher and top editors at The Times have in no way backed off their decision to publish. Bill Keller, the executive editor, made that plain in an e-mail message to me that I posted on the public editor's Web site. "Obviously I disagree,'' he said. ''And so, I think, do most serious journalists.'' In retrospect, it also occurs to me that allowing Mr. Keller to state his disagreement in the column could have made it a little harder for readers to treat my mea culpa as a Times decision.
        The Times has gone to unusual lengths to make the public editor totally independent. It exercises absolutely no control over what I write in the space regularly provided to me in The Sunday Times and post on the public editor's blog. Mr. Keller and other top editors don't even see this column before it is published. They often strongly disagree with my assessments of the paper's performance -- especially when I criticize their specific editing decisions.
        The most practical evidence that I don't speak for The Times can be found in a review of the remedial actions and changes in newsgathering practices and standards that I've recommended in previous columns. Even if some of the suggestions happen to be valid, no one in the Times newsroom has to heed them. And in a number of instances, I haven't detected any evidence that the recommendations are being implemented.
        There has been no effort to formally set the record straight on how long the paper held its Pulitzer Prize-winning story on warrantless eavesdropping. Full names aren't being required on the growing number of readers' opinions posted on nytimes.com. Readers aren't being given an indication as to whether the reporter on an article is a freelancer. Books by Times staff members are still being reviewed. And Times news staff members remain free to accept discounts on goods and services from a wide range of businesses that are covered by the paper.
        The record speaks for itself. I don't speak for The Times.
        THE PUBLIC EDITOR
        Correction:  January 7, 2007, Sunday  The byline was omitted from the Dec. 17 public editor column. The column was by Byron Calame.
      