
        To the Editor:
        Re ''The Road to Reliable Elections'' (editorial, Dec. 11):
        You talk about electronic voting machines that ''produce paper records that voters can review to ensure that their votes were correctly recorded.''
        But a paper receipt proves nothing about how a vote was actually recorded.
        A corrupted voting machine could print out a voter's choices correctly but record them differently.
        To verify votes, a record of each vote, along with a unique key provided to the voter, could be published.
        Then each voter could check his or her vote against the record. If a discrepancy is claimed, the paper record could be checked.
        The method you propose is not benign and would lead to a false sense of security. The only thing it is good for is recounts.
        A. P. Healy  Chappaqua, N.Y., Dec. 11, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Big Shift Seen in Voting Methods With Turn Back to a Paper Trail'' (front page, Dec. 8):
        Eliminating long lines in voting precincts should be part of election changes by 2008.
        Besides problematic voting machines, we need to address mismatches between the numbers of voting machines with support personnel in a precinct and patterns of voter arrivals.
        Long lines can cause would-be voters to abstain, a stealth disenfranchisement. We need a federal standard for a maximum waiting time to cast a vote.
        Science can help.
        Queuing theory and optimization, widely used in the public and private sectors to manage long lines, can determine the deployment of voting machines, meeting the waiting-time standard and assuring equal voting accessibility to all.
        Such science will discourage partisan authorities to manipulate voting resources in attempts to deter voters who are likely to favor their political opponents.
        Alexander S. Belenky  Richard C. Larson  Cambridge, Mass., Dec. 9, 2006
        The writers are, respectively, a visiting scholar and director of the Center for Engineering Systems at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
        To the Editor:
        Optically scanned paper ballots filled out by hand or by a ballot marking machine work. The paper ballot is then fed into a high-speed scanner.
        The voter gets to check his own ballot, which is a reliable, verifiable audit trail.
        It is a trivial matter for a programmer to change computer code so that the voter sees and prints a receipt correctly and then the machine changes the count internally.
        The rogue computer program can then erase its tracks and become invisible.
        If there is a challenge, the optically scanned paper ballot must be the vote that counts. No vendor should be considered who refuses to make his source code available.
        To paraphrase an old saying, A billion here and a billion there in lost sales gets a vendor's attention.
        William Zeph Ginsberg  New York, Dec. 8, 2006
        To the Editor:
        You say advocates for disabled people will not support changes in voting legislation because according to these advocates, ''touch-screen machines are the easiest for blind people to use.'' This is simply not the case.
        As a blind voter, I have always dreamed of having the opportunity to cast an independent, private and verifiable vote, but the modified touch-screen machines have not made this a reality for me.
        I have been fortunate to have friends who helped me cast my vote, but I have not really been able to verify that my vote has been cast correctly.
        Fortunately, there are both high-tech and low-tech solutions to this problem that give people with disabilities access to the ballot.
        We must work to make it possible for everyone, with or without disabilities, to have the opportunity to cast a truly independent, private and verifiable vote.
        Suzanne Erb  Philadelphia, Dec. 10, 2006
      