
        Cindy Sheehan, the antiwar activist, was convicted yesterday of trespassing while trying to deliver an antiwar petition last March to United States diplomats at the United Nations.
        After a weeklong trial in Manhattan Criminal Court, the jury took about five hours to convict Ms. Sheehan and three other women of trespassing, which is a violation, the legal equivalent of ''spitting on the sidewalk,'' said Steven M. Cohen, a defense lawyer. They were acquitted of resisting arrest, disorderly conduct and obstructing governmental administration. Judge A. Kirke Bartley Jr. refused a prosecution request to sentence the women to community service, and let them go, on the condition that they stay out of trouble.
        ''I am so angry,'' Ms. Sheehan said after the verdict, denouncing the trial as a waste of time and money. She urged supporters to join her and her co-defendants, Susan Benjamin, Melissa Beattie and the Rev. Patricia Ackerman, in returning to the mission to try once again to deliver the petition.
        This time, they succeeded, as Richard Grenell, a spokesman for the mission, and Peggy Kerry, a liaison officer with the mission, came down to accept a hastily recreated petition with 32 signatures. Ms. Sheehan became prominent in Iraq war protests when she spent most of August 2005 in a vigil outside President Bush's ranch in Texas, demanding to speak to him about the death of her son Casey in Iraq.
        The trial resulted from her arrest in March when she and about 50 other protesters tried to deliver their petition to the United States Mission on East 45th Street. Ms. Sheehan and the three other women were denied entry to the building and were arrested in a plaza in front of it.
        Their trial boiled down to a clash between high principles, represented by the Zola-like lead defense lawyer, Robert C. Gottlieb, and the black letter of the law, represented by William Beesch.
        In his closing, Mr. Gottlieb argued that the women were being punished for their political views. ''They are the patriots,'' he said. ''To suggest anything else is unworthy.''
        Mr. Beesch, the prosecutor, contended that the women wanted to be arrested. Otherwise, ''Does anyone even think it's going to get in AM New York?'' he said, referring to a free newspaper. ''In this case, what you're seeing going on is not civil disobedience, it's civil defiance,'' Mr. Beesch said.
        Mr. Gottlieb accused the prosecution of ''piling on'' charges. But Mr. Beesch observed that on a videotape of the protest, a scrap of paper, perhaps a leaflet, could be seen fluttering around the feet of one defendant. ''By the way,'' he said dryly, ''no one was arrested for littering.''
      