
        Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates, visiting Iraq on his second day in office, said Wednesday that senior commanders had expressed their concern to him that sending more American troops to Iraq might delay the Iraqi government from taking responsibility for its own security.
        Mr. Gates told reporters that he was still in the early stages of developing recommendations for President Bush on shifting course in Iraq and that he was ''reserving judgment'' on whether sending more troops was advisable.
        His visit to Iraq highlighted the importance the administration is attaching to coming up with a new strategy for Iraq but also the internal divisions that are appearing in the administration.
        The coolness with which military commanders in Iraq have greeted the idea of a surge in troop numbers has become the first test of Mr. Gates's ability to mediate between civilian and uniformed officials, a task that led to considerable friction for his predecessor, Donald H. Rumsfeld.
        Some civilian officials in the Bush administration are advocating a temporary force increase in Iraq of 20,000 troops or more as a move for Mr. Bush to announce next month that may help restore security in Baghdad. There are currently about 140,000 United States troops in Iraq.
        Mr. Gates said his talks with Gen. George W. Casey Jr., the top ground commander in Iraq, and Gen. John P. Abizaid, the top American commander for the Middle East, included discussions of ''the possibility of a surge and the potential for what it might accomplish.''
        But at a news conference with Mr. Gates standing next to him, General Casey indicated that he wanted to see a more thorough plan for how the additional troops would be used before he would endorse the idea.
        ''Additional troops have to be for a purpose,'' the general said. ''I'm not necessarily opposed to the idea, but what I want to see happen is, if we do bring more American troops here, they help us progress toward our strategic objectives.''
        Where Mr. Gates comes down on the question of whether to increase troop levels may provide an early indication of how much his views on how to proceed in Iraq will differ from those of Mr. Rumsfeld, who long pushed to hold down troop levels.
        Mr. Gates said Wednesday that the concern that more American forces might deter Iraq's government from assuming greater responsibility and still might not lead to a permanent reduction in violence was ''clearly a consideration'' in deciding whether to go forward with the idea. Accompanying Mr. Gates on his trip was Gen. Peter Pace, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
        ''The commanders have expressed a concern about that,'' Mr. Gates said. But he also noted that they had sought more troops temporarily in the past ''when they felt there was a specific mission and a specific purpose.''
        Mr. Gates added that he also wanted to talk in coming days to Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki about what the scale of the American military effort should be before formulating any recommendations for Mr. Bush.
        General Casey has been pressing Mr. Maliki to send more Iraqi troops to Baghdad, and American commanders are concerned that a major announcement of an American buildup, even a temporary one, could lead to further delays in getting those units in place.
        American commanders are also concerned that a troop surge, which they would probably accomplish with early deployment of brigades already due to go to Iraq and by holding over some units already here, would place further strain on the overstretched military.
        Mr. Bush said Wednesday that he was ready to increase the overall size of the United States military and that he had directed Mr. Gates to put together a plan to do so. But Mr. Gates noted that any increase in the active-duty Army's total force level, which is currently authorized at 512,000, would not alleviate any of the strain on the overall force from immediate troop increases in Iraq.
        ''A decision to increase the size of the Army today really won't show up in trained troops for some period of time,'' he said.
        Mr. Rumsfeld pushed throughout his tenure to hold down the American troop presence in Iraq as well as the overall size of the military. He wrote a memo just days before his resignation in November that suggested that one of the ideas the administration ought to consider was to ''go minimalist,'' withdrawing from cities and shrinking its presence in Iraq substantially.
        That recommendation was similar to the plan put forward by the Iraq Study Group, which called for, among other steps, a shift of the American effort into training Iraqi forces, to permit combat units to begin withdrawing early next year. Mr. Gates was a member of the commission until resigning after he was nominated to be defense secretary.
        While Mr. Gates has spoken approvingly in recent weeks of some of the panel's recommendations, he also emphasized that an American failure in Iraq would be a ''calamity'' that could lead to a wider regional conflict in the Middle East.
        ''I think there's nothing more important than succeeding here in Iraq,'' Mr. Gates said. As a member of the Iraq Study Group, he added, ''I didn't dream at that time I would have actual responsibility for what goes forward.''
      