
        A foundation Web site is about the last place online that one would expect to find ideas for holiday gift giving. But the Case Foundation is offering a ''guide to charitable gifts'' with suggestions like giving to KickStart, which develops simple technologies like a treadle-operated water pump to help turn subsistence farms into commercial enterprises.
        The guide is the brainchild of Jean Case, whose husband, Steve, founded America Online. Like other new philanthropists, the Cases consider their foundation's Web site every bit as much a strategic investment as the projects their money underwrites.
        Ms. Case said the goal was to make the Web site a bridge between organizations working on interesting projects and people who want to become involved in such efforts. ''Connection points are needed probably as much as dollars,'' she said.
        The site, casefoundation.org, has several pages on giving, and dozens of links to the Web sites of charities. It also provides links to businesses that pledge to donate part of every sale to charity or have built social consciousness into their mission.
        The foundation believes the gift-giving guide is at least partly responsible for a 30 percent increase in traffic this month, compared to November, said Mark Miller, a foundation spokesman.
        Other emerging philanthropists are also using the Internet to engage a broad audience. Pierre Omidyar, the founder of eBay, and Jeff Skoll, the former president of eBay, have each started social networking sites that try to build on their work, both philanthropic and in support of commerce with a social benefit.
        ''I think these days people want to have other people join with them to make a change,'' Mr. Skoll said.
        Joel L. Fleishman, a Duke professor with a long career in philanthropy and nonprofit work, applauded such efforts as long overdue. In his new book, ''The Foundation: A Great American Secret; How Private Wealth Is Changing the World,'' Mr. Fleishman takes foundations to task as holding themselves aloof and cloaking their activities in secrecy.
        ''What Case is doing is exactly the opposite of that,'' he said. ''They're trying to engage people in the issues they care about, which is another way of leveraging the time, energy and money they put into their grant making.''
        Oxfam America, the American affiliate of the British relief and development group, is mentioned in an article on the foundation's Web site as a source of ''alternative'' gifts.
        This year, the organization set up a Web site, Oxfamamericaunwrapped.com, where it ''sells'' items to be donated to the needy, from a can of worms for a fishing village at $18, to disaster warning systems at $1,300. To date, a $45 sheep is the biggest seller.
        Boys and Girls Clubs of America was unaware that it was on the Case foundation's guide until a reporter asked about it. ''It's a huge benefit for us on two fronts,'' said Cyndi Court, the organization's senior vice president for resource development.
        ''First, the end of the year is always an important time for us because of the increase in giving that goes on,'' Ms. Court said, ''but this is also important because it gives us access to what may be a different set of individual supporters.''
      