
        Bowing to pressure from relatives of the 12 men who died in an explosion at the Sago mine in January, West Virginia officials yesterday postponed the release of their report on the disaster until the survivors' questions can be answered.
        At the heart of the dispute were not the findings themselves, which were to have been released yesterday, but the way they were presented, said Lara Ramsburg, a spokeswoman for Gov. Joe Manchin.
        Unlike other reports on recent mining disasters, Ms. Ramsburg said, this one was not accompanied by a simplified summary or PowerPoint presentation that would have helped the families and the governor understand the findings by the Office of Miners' Health Safety and Training.
        ''The governor and the families had the same problem with the report, that it was not done in a way that was easy to understand all the data,'' said Ms. Ramsburg, who attended the meeting at West Virginia Wesleyan College where the governor and relatives of the miners received the report.
        Some family members also were upset that they learned of the report's primary conclusion -- that the explosion was caused by lightning -- from reading comments in the news media by Ronald Wooten, director of the mining agency, said Phil Smith, a spokesman for the United Mine Workers of America.
        The report confirms suspicions that arose hours after the Jan. 2 explosion trapped 13 miners that a powerful lightning strike had ignited methane gas trapped in a sealed-off section of the mine, according to The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, which obtained an advance copy of the document. The lightning's exact path is still unknown, the newspaper said.
        The report also found that 10 walls built to seal off older sections of the mine were blown apart by the explosion, which was found to have generated more than 95 pounds of pressure per square inch, according to The Associated Press. Federal regulations at the time required the walls to withstand 20 pounds per square inch, said J. Davitt McAteer, who investigated the mine disaster on behalf of Governor Manchin in the spring.
      