
        Paul Tough's article (Nov. 26) on closing the race and class gaps in school performance usefully looked beyond what schools do to what parents do and to the enormous gaps in parent-child communication among middle-class and poorer families, in vocabulary, in the ratio of encouragement to discouragement and in promoting questioning and critical discussion, rather than simple obedience to orders.
        But what lies behind this ''parenting gap''? Might the poor and less-skilled working-class parents be replicating with their children what they experience on the job -- limited opportunities to develop a wide range of skills, demands for simple obedience rather than discussion of what to do next, an authoritarian environment of bosses and managers full of ''negative communications'' and the frustrations of low pay, low recognition for their work and pervasive powerlessness?
        Longer school hours, intensive tutoring and more quality pre-schooling may reduce the school-performance gap between the economic classes, but they cannot eliminate it. Schools are asked to overcome the effects of a system of stratification in which some people do the thinking and give the orders while other people are expected to simply obey orders and perform repetitive tasks out of fear of losing their jobs, while raising families on very low incomes. Schooling by itself cannot destratify a class society; class structure keeps reproducing itself. It needs to be attacked head on.
        Allen H. Barton
        Chapel Hill, N.C.
        Your article on education spent only a few lines on an obstacle of charter schools -- the teachers' union. A review of the National Education Association's Web site shows that the union is not merely ''skeptical'' of charter schools but also fights other potential reforms, including vouchers and merit pay. The only ''solution'' consistently advocated by the teachers' union is to put additional money into a system that has failed for the vast majority of poor, minority students.
        S.D. Steele
        Newton, Mass.
        My thanks to Paul Tough for a thorough analysis of No Child Left Behind as it applies to minority students. He did not mention, however, one of the most pernicious aspects of the legislation as it affects most of our classrooms: it treats all schools as if they were the same.
        This failure to distinguish among different schools with their very different student populations and, therefore, different needs, makes solving the problems of low-performing schools impossible and, as I have been experiencing for the past five years, injects unnecessary and often counterproductive requirements into schools that had been performing well. As a result, our worst schools only seem better and our best schools are in danger of slipping into mediocrity (simpler textbooks that all students can read; simpler classes that all students can pass).
        The statistics cited at the beginning of Tough's article indicate that we are reducing the performance gap as much by causing high-performing schools to do worse as by helping low-performing schools to do better.
        George Wallach
        Fremont, Calif.
        Your article omits mention of an enormous factor in children's lives today: the influence of a frenetic, often-violent and fiercely anti-intellectual popular culture.
        While it is true that middle-class children may wallow in this morass of video games and rap videos as well, less-privileged youngsters do not have the advantage of parents who can offer an alternative behavioral universe. I recently tutored a fifth-grade girl who couldn't name the president of the United States, but effortlessly pinpointed the profile and dispositions of a pantheon of pop stars.
        Doug Brin
        New York
        This was a very encouraging article about people actually doing something to address a longstanding national problem. Instead of profiting from sales of polemical books and television appearances, organizations like Kipp are on the ground making a real difference. I am concerned, however, about Kipp's desire not to attract too many well-prepared students. It is these very students that have the most to lose if they remain in inadequate public schools. Surrounded by peers that often view high academic achievement as ''acting white,'' they risk succumbing to the prevailing low standards.
        Raheem M. Cash
        Alexandria, Va.
        Paul Tough accurately points out that a child's family life is the dominant factor in determining success at school. I've taught for 15 years in a public high school. The first week of every school year, I ask each class for a show of hands to the question ''How many of you ate dinner with your family (TV turned off) at least three of the last seven nights?'' Overwhelmingly, the lifted hands belong to students who will maintain a high class average, will do well on standardized tests, will speak and write with an advanced vocabulary and will not be a discipline problem.
        No Child Should Be Left Behind at Home -- but that is a tough one to legislate.
        Jjay Moore
        Abilene, Tex.
      