
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Options Weighed for Surge in G.I.'s to Stabilize Iraq'' (front page, Dec. 16):
        The talk of sending 20,000 to 50,000 more troops to Iraq will result in thousands more America haters outside of Iraq going there to fight our soldiers.
        Will the justification then be that we drew more terrorists to Iraq so that they will not come here to kill us? That is a disgusting way of using our brave soldiers.
        Elliot Kotler  Ossining, N.Y., Dec. 16, 2006
        To the Editor:
        In November, the American people went to the polls to send a clear message: we want our country out of Iraq. That's called democracy.
        In December, the president contemplates sending more troops. That's called dictatorship. Who says it can't happen here?
        Lydia Anderson  Old Greenwich, Conn., Dec. 16, 2006
        To the Editor:
        It seems clear that President Bush has already made up his mind on the ''surge'' in troop strength in Iraq. We all remember that in 2002 he kept saying he hadn't made up his mind on whether or not to invade Iraq. My wife, my children, I and millions of others were not fooled. We knew that the decision had been made.
        This time, the president has not tried to fool us. He placed the Iraq Study Group report in the circular file and proceeded to get backing for ''the way forward,'' making it clear that he does not want to accept defeat and will not countenance a withdrawal.
        Just add it up: the troop strength will be increased. You can depend on it!
        Leonard Cohen  Tarrytown, N.Y., Dec. 16, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Re ''In Farewell, Rumsfeld Warns Weakness Is 'Provocative' '' (news article, Dec. 16):
        Donald H. Rumsfeld, in his farewell address as defense secretary, warns us that weakness or the perception of weakness is provocative to enemies and potential enemies.
        These are not the only things that are provocative. Equally provocative are the perceptions that what we consider strength is mere brutality, and that the United States is bent on dominating the world.
        Which of these contrasting perceptions is more provocative to international terrorists?
        Emmett Barcalow  Northampton, Mass., Dec. 16, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Farewell, Dense Prince,'' by Maureen Dowd (column, Dec. 16):
        President Bush says that ''I'm sleeping a lot better than people would assume'' and that his presidency is ''a joyful experience.''
        This from a president who is responsible for the needless death, maiming and suffering of thousands of people and who is jeopardizing the future well-being of millions more.
        Photographs of Abraham Lincoln taken at the beginning and end of the Civil War reveal the deep anguish and responsibility he felt for the terrible loss of life that occurred.
        Woodrow Wilson aged a great deal and suffered a debilitating stroke after the end of World War I.
        Photographs of Franklin D. Roosevelt taken from 1941 to 1945 show a steady decline from a robust man to one haggard with worry and grief.
        Lyndon B. Johnson was profoundly affected by the deaths of tens of thousands of American soldiers in the Vietnam War and died before it ended.
        In contrast, George W. Bush acts unfazed by the death and destruction he has caused.
        Wendell Tangborn  Vashon Island, Wash., Dec. 17, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Iraq's Legal System Staggers Beneath the Weight of War'' (''Law and Disorder'' series, front page, Dec. 17):
        ''Justice delayed is justice denied'' is a highly revered saying in American jurisprudence, but injustices can be perpetrated when shortcuts are taken in judicial procedure.
        Token legal representation by lawyers who haven't had a chance to speak beforehand with the clients they are called upon to represent or who are not given the time to investigate the evidence of those facing trial makes a mockery of justice.
        While the caseload is exceedingly high, expedited trials that do not afford basic rights to defendants invite possible injustice and, worse, create disrespect for the law.
        Cy  Shain  San Francisco, Dec. 17, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Re ''American Recalls Torment as a U.S. Detainee in Iraq'' (''Law and Disorder'' series, front page, Dec. 18):
        It is a dubious distinction: thanks to the Bush administration, the United States is now an equal-opportunity torturer and abuser of human rights.
        Whether you are a whistle-blowing American, an innocent Iraqi in the wrong place at the wrong time or an alleged terrorist, you'll be subjected to relentless physical abuse, held indefinitely without charges, denied access to legal counsel or not even allowed to see the charges against you.
        Democrats, January can't come soon enough.
        Deirdre Peterson  New York, Dec. 18, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Lessons learned from Donald Vance's imprisonment and abuse at the hands of his American captors (''American Recalls Torment as a U.S. Detainee in Iraq''):
        Lesson 1: Do not report shady or suspicious behavior by military contractors in Iraq, especially if weapons are involved.
        Lesson 2: If you ignore Lesson 1, do not expect to emerge from the Kafka novel that your life will become unless you are an American citizen and/or a United States military veteran with friends in the United States who have the time, dedication and skill at political agitation sufficient to interest members of Congress and rights groups in your case.
        Non-Americans: Pay special attention to Lesson 2 when considering Lesson 1.
        Katie O'Harra  Bellaire, Tex., Dec. 18, 2006
      