
        THE REV. AL SHARPTON and I don't have much in common -- you could argue that's a blessing for both of us -- but we do share a defining backdrop for our wonder years in Brooklyn. At different times, we both attended Samuel J. Tilden High School.
        And both of us were chagrined by the announcement Monday by the New York City Department of Education that Tilden -- deemed unsafe and unsalvageable academically -- would be closed and replaced by a cluster of smaller and presumably more manageable institutions.
        The article about the announcement in The New York Times pointed out that the simultaneous closing of Lafayette High School in Bensonhurst might attract more attention, since its graduates included Sandy Koufax and Larry King.
        But Tilden alumni are hardly slouches. In addition to Mr. Sharpton, they include the Mets manager Willie Randolph, the labor leader Victor Gotbaum, the former White House counsel Leonard Garment, the writer Murray Polner, the jurist Milton Mollen and the weightlifter Dan Lurie.
        Sid Gordon batted for Tilden before joining the baseball Giants. Ronnie Blye broke scoring records at the school before playing for the football Giants. The folk humorist Sam Levenson, though not an alumnus, taught Spanish there in the 1940s.
        Jake Ehrenreich, whose memory play, ''A Jew Grows in Brooklyn,'' opened Off Broadway in October, not only graduated from Tilden but also makes his entrance on stage wearing a Tilden sweatshirt, emblazoned with a giant T. (I still have mine; it doesn't fit.)
        Tilden, which opened in 1930, was built to accommodate about 3,800 students. But within a decade, enrollment swelled by 50 percent. I grew up about a mile away, on Kings Highway, one block from the hulking New Lots el, which more or less defined the border between East Flatbush and Brownsville. Almost overnight, Brownsville, heavily blue collar and lower-middle class, would be recast from Jewish to black. We lived in what we considered solidly middle-class East Flatbush, which I deluded myself into thinking was an integrated neighborhood because an Italian family lived on our corner.
        And so I proudly attended Tilden, which really was in East Flatbush. My older sister, Dixie, had just graduated from Tilden, where she had been editor of the student newspaper, Tilden Topics. Those were footsteps I wanted to follow.
        Also, I like underdogs, and like almost everybody at Tilden during those years, I knew that its namesake was a New York governor who had won the popular vote for president in 1876 but been deprived of the job because supporters of Rutherford B. Hayes had stolen the election in Congress.
        Tilden left an indelible impression on me. I still remember the taste of my daily tuna on rye and chocolate doughnut from the cafeteria. My Proustian moment, though, was inspired by chlorine. I can still smell it from the pool, and I still avoid combination locks because I shiver just thinking how I would fumble with mine every time I returned naked to the locker room after swim class.
        The school wasn't perfect. As early as 1958, a police officer was regularly stationed outside. We abandoned the annual Thanksgiving football rivalry with Jefferson High School in nearby East New York because more injuries were suffered in the stands than on the field. Someone parodied the lyrics of the predictably sappy school song, ''Hail Tilden High,'' as ''Hail Tilden's High,'' although I suspect that the title of the spoof referred to nothing worse than a six-pack.
        After last week's announcement by the Department of Education, I dug out my musty 1964 Tilden yearbook. Since we graduated on the stage of the old Loew's Kings on Flatbush Avenue, I'd been in touch with a handful of Tildenites and knew what had become of them. Robert Ellman became a teacher, just as he'd predicted in the yearbook. Marilyn Schwartz became an educator, too, and acquitted herself in the thankless role of spokeswoman for the school district that includes Columbine High School in Colorado. Paul Nussbaum had said he wanted to be a politician; he became chairman of a giant hotel chain.
        Most of the girls said they wanted to be teachers or stenographers. One boy wanted to be a roofer. Was that really what they aspired to? And did their dreams come true? Did Ilene Kleinman become a psychiatrist? Did Philip Asher become a choreographer? Judy Gitlin had been voted most likely to succeed. Did she? At what?
        It's clear how the Department of Education defines success, and failure. At Tilden, fewer than 44 percent of students scheduled to graduate last June did so, and only half of those got a Regents diploma.
        In the 1930s, Tilden established the school system's first guidance department to effectively deal with what was quaintly described as juvenile delinquency. Now it is considered one of the city's most dangerous schools.
        Mr. Ehrenreich, author of ''A Jew Grows in Brooklyn,'' graduated in 1973. The year before was a historic one for Mr. Sharpton. Not just because he got his diploma from Tilden, but because 1972 may have been the only time that he refused to be photographed. He boycotted the yearbook photo op, he recalled the other day, because ''we were protesting something or other.''
        IT turns out that he and I share something else we learned at Tilden. In the Tilden I attended, nearly 98 percent of the students were classified as ''others,'' a euphemism the Board of Education used to designate people who were neither black nor Hispanic. Still, the mix of ethnicities and religions made the school much more multicultural than any place I'd ever been.
        By the time Mr. Sharpton graduated, the proportion of ''others'' had shrunk to 63 percent, which was still considerably more than he would have encountered if he had stayed put on Lenox Road near the Brownsville border.
        ''We knew whites from the Kings Highway bus going to Tilden,'' Mr. Sharpton recalled. ''It became where we learned about life in the city beyond our own particular corridor.''
        Right around the time Mr. Sharpton was attending Tilden, Sam Levenson was asked how the old neighborhood had changed since he taught there. More mixed, he replied. And, by that standard, better. ''No matter where I go, or how successful or unsuccessful I am,'' he explained, ''I never in my life shall ever feel that 'they' are coming. There is no 'they' to me, because I know about being 'they'; I have been 'they.' ''
        CITY LORE
      