
        Gov. George Pataki is a man in a hurry. After 12 years in office and about two weeks before he moves on -- possibly to campaign for the White House -- Mr. Pataki is eager for more conservative ribbons on his lapel. But after he called a special legislative session this week, New York's Legislature, never known for speed, moved into its slowest gear.
        In fact, almost nothing of consequence happened, which in this case was real progress. The consolidation of state hospitals remained intact. There were no pay raises for legislators who have not done enough to deserve them. Legislation that might have zipped from rough draft into final (and faulty) law got slowed down so the public, most lawmakers and even the insiders will now have time to consider it.
        The governor was angling mainly for an ill-conceived bill to extend civil confinement for sexual predators, beyond their prison terms. He also wanted authorization for 200 more charter schools, an expansion that could hurt some public schools, especially upstate. Mr. Pataki's parting wish list also included the approval of up to 400 appointments to a variety of boards and authorities across the state. Unfortunately, he got those, a send-off from the State Senate, which approves gubernatorial appointments and is controlled by fellow Republicans. Mr. Pataki indignantly blamed Democrats and, particularly, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver for the empty session. Perhaps sharpening his skills for the national political stage, he suggested that if a sexual predator gets out of jail and harms anybody, it will be thanks to Mr. Silver's ''political failure.'' And Mr. Pataki made it sound as though the Democrats were holding up this four-star, all-American legislation simply because they wanted a pay raise.
        Of course, they all want a pay raise, including the Republicans. But Mr. Silver insisted the real reason for the delay is that he would rather wait for the arrival of the new Democratic governor, Eliot Spitzer, than rush to grant a lame duck governor's departing wish list.
        It will certainly be a different political mix starting Jan. 1. But we always need our legislators to take the time to do their work carefully -- and, we hope, more openly. So at this point, this do-nothing session in Albany turned out to be the right thing to do.
        Editorial
      