
        Tawanda Parker, 26, keeps the photo album stored carefully in a thick plastic bag. Inside, there is a picture of her first day at a foster home, holding a blue stuffed bear while her sister holds a pink bunny. Another shows one of Ms. Parker's brothers turning 8 at a Chuck E. Cheese restaurant somewhere in New Jersey. And, preserved in color, the last day she spent with her birth mother.
        ''If you can look at my face, my mom reached over because I didn't want to leave,'' Ms. Parker recalled as she flipped through the pages. ''She tickled my neck. I'm very ticklish.''
        For children placed outside their homes because of abuse or neglect, such photo albums, known as ''life books,'' can be a crucial mechanism, social workers say, to help them remember -- and later, understand -- where they have been and where they are going. Caseworkers in New Jersey decided recently to provide such life books to all children placed outside their homes, and to encourage social workers to take snapshots of them with their foster parents and siblings, and their new neighborhood, in the first month after placement.
        ''Youths who have life books have a very tangible tool,'' said Eileen Crummy, director of the State Division of Youth and Family Services. ''They can look back at it, and not have to reconstruct the memories for themselves.''
        Ms. Parker, whose fresh-scrubbed apartment has photographs on walls, tucked in mirrors and framed en masse on tables, has trouble counting the places she lived after she entered foster care when she was 11. She calls her life book ''my baby,'' and cradles its worn pages, fussing over the ''e'' from ''Life'' that kept falling off the cover.
        ''There was Joralemon Street,'' she began. ''We lived there first with that family, and then we moved to the south, but we didn't stay there because we were abused in that home.''
        Ms. Parker stayed in eight foster or group homes before landing at a home for teenage mothers at age 16. In some places, she and her three siblings stayed together. In most, they did not. But they picked up and lost pseudo-siblings along the way.
        ''This little boy here, we became close,'' she said, pointing to a snapshot of a grinning child. ''We were all in the same foster home until he was placed somewhere else.''
        After her biological mother died, Ms. Parker said, she used bits preserved in the life book to contact a newspaper in Trinidad in search of relatives. ''Without it I don't know if I would remember my mom's face,'' she said.
        Deridre Carter, who was Ms. Parker's social worker for many years, sometimes asks the children she works with if they will share their books with their therapists.
        ''When they go to therapy with issues of loss and separation, this is something tangible for them,'' she said. ''If I don't have anything permanent in my life in terms of consistency, a life book is like the glue that holds it all together.''
        For Jarisa Brannon-Davis, 18, who lived in at least four foster homes before being sent to a group home, the life book played a crucial role in her adoption. She was 13, and boxing in the East Orange Police Athletic League program run by Sgt. DeLacy Davis. When another officer told Sergeant Davis that one of the pictures in Jarisa's life book showed her in a suggestive pose, he put the book away in his file cabinet, as he did not want anyone who might adopt her to get the wrong impression.
        Later, when a person who wanted to adopt Jarisa needed a picture, she asked him to return the book.
        ''He said, 'I'll adopt you,' and I started to cry, since I wanted to ask him for six months, but couldn't bring it up,'' Ms. Brannon-Davis recalled.
        She has three life books. One includes an old page labeled ''Activity #4, Family Activity,'' with instructions to ''draw a picture of your family doing something together.'' Under the drawing, she wrote: ''We're playing and hitting each other.'' There are also snapshots of favorite social workers, and a game of Pin the Nose on the Pumpkin.
        ''As I look back now, it helps me realize I was that kid, you're still a kid, you're not that old, even though you tend to act like an old person,'' Ms. Brannon-Davis said, smiling as the family cockatoo squawked in its cage. ''I'm surprised I held on to it. You lose a lot of things when you go from place to place. These were the three things I didn't lose. It meant something, because I didn't lose it.''
        Lisa Haase of Ridgewood, who adopted her foster son, Ghana, 6, said that life books were helpful to the many children who go through the child welfare system feeling abandoned by their birth parents.
        ''Look at this picture,'' she said, pointing to a picture of Ghana's birth mother, whom he calls Mama Mary, smiling while giving him a bear hug. ''Does this lady look like she wants to abandon this child? She fought tooth and nail for him for two and a half years. That's good for him to know.''
        Ghana's book, which Ms. Haase and her daughter compiled, has carefully labeled pictures of him with Mama Mary, and little captions saying ''I love my mom.'' There's also a wrapper from a Ghana chocolate bar, which the Haases handed out to friends at his christening. And a baby picture of him drooling rather extravagantly.
        The books help cement adoptive and foster families by breaking taboos, said Rebecca Cerutti, a social worker at the family outreach program at Robins' Nest, a nonprofit organization in Glassboro that runs group homes.
        ''If a child is sitting there hearing the foster parent saying wonderful things about the birth parent, that is just ideal,'' she said. ''The message is that the birth parent is someone they can talk about, without hurting the foster or adoptive parent.''
        Kevin M. Ryan, the commissioner of the Department of Children and Families, said that thumbing through life books spurred him on in the agency's effort to place children in permanent homes.
        ''They remind you there are no unwanted children, just unfound families,'' Mr. Ryan said.
        Some 2,000 children in New Jersey are waiting to be adopted; as of the middle of November, the state had exceeded its 2006 goal of finalizing 1,100 adoptions.
        Lori Khan, 25, of Williamstown, whose life in foster care or group homes began when she was a year old, recently pulled out her life book to show her 3 -year-old son, Cory.
        ''He was just saying, 'Mommy plays basketball,' and he was just like grinning and smiling looking at the pictures,'' she said. ''It was too cute.''
        ''It brings back good times that you had,'' she added.
      