
        LIFETIME TELEVISION may be ahead of the digital curve, but when it came to designing a new Manhattan operations center, replacing old quarters inside a dark basement in Astoria, Queens, it decided to keep all its technology behind the scenes. The employees would be the stars of this production.
        ''We knew we had to build a technical facility,'' said Gwynne McConkey, the senior vice president for operations, information systems and technology for Lifetime Television and the Lifetime Movie Network. ''But equally important was to create a space that was welcoming to the people who worked there.''
        The idea was to separate the main work area from all the technology, which can be found up ramps or steps and behind walls and glass partitions in the building's core.
        The new space, which employees occupied last spring, includes workstations that face 10-foot-high windows with views of a playground. There are also casual corners for congregating, private places for meditating and a cafe for lingering, along with art to ponder and banquettes big enough for snoozing during particularly long shifts.
        Designed by Bice C. Wilson, a principal at Meridian Design Associates, the operations center occupies 50,000 square feet. It is on the second floor of the mammoth 15-story building, constructed in 1932 as the Port Authority Commerce Building, at 111 Eighth Ave. in Chelsea. The building is one of the city's largest in terms of total area -- 2.8 million square feet, according to Taconic Investment Partners, its manager and a co-owner -- and occupies an entire city block between Eighth and Ninth Avenues and West 15th and 16th Streets.
        According to Mr. Wilson, the division of technology and work space at Lifetime was made possible by advances in digital technology that are specific to the broadcast industry and result in truly tapeless operations.
        Desktops are clear -- no more teetering stacks of tapes or canyons of computer equipment. ''All you need at the actual workstation are the keyboard and monitor,'' said Mr. Wilson, who was the designer of the CBS studio on Fifth Avenue at 59th Street. ''All the clutter is gone.''
        Lifetime's facilities in Queens had measured about 100,000 square feet on two levels. About 70 percent of the studio space was for taping original programming, an operation now scattered around the country, and 30 percent, or around 30,000 square feet, was devoted to technology and administration.
        At the new Manhattan space, there are no studios. Technology takes up only 15 percent of the space, which the previous tenant used for storage. The space that isn't devoted to technology is designed around workers' comfort, and to foster interaction. It is divided into a series of loosely defined areas along a meandering pathway. Feng shui principals that were applied to the design dictated that there be no deadening straight corridors that can sap creative energy, Mr. Wilson said.
        He compared such linear corridors to straight rivers that flow too rapidly and erode the banks. ''A river that runs straight runs fast and scours the landscape,'' he said. ''A river that meanders drops silt and lays the groundwork for fertile farmland.''
        The metaphorical riverbed runs more or less parallel to a wall of 10-foot-high windows that bathe the space in natural light, which even the workers in darkened editing rooms can see through glass partitions. ''They can walk a matter of feet and see if it's raining or snowing outside,'' Ms. McConkey said.
        Each area along the ramble is intended as a place for workers to congregate, either to work in teams or to take breaks from intense and solitary editing duties.
        In the ''town hall'' area, anyone can sit at a workstation, grab a cappuccino or check availability of an editing room on an airport-style scheduling monitor. A curving, bright red seating unit with a high wooden back divides the space to accommodate a handful of small groups, though walls in the area can roll back to make a single space large enough for 150 people.
        A cafe is at the center of ''the cave,'' the central area through which the main traffic path runs. It is also set up for many employees, who may number about 90 on any given shift in the 24-hour-a-day schedule.
        Opposite the cafe is a quirky village of structures that resemble huts, complete with cedar roofs, that are actually editing rooms. With saunalike paneled interiors and wheat-colored exterior walls, their playful Club Med feel is echoed in whimsical furniture like the oversized couch in the town hall and the cheerful color palette throughout.
        Each area along the uneven trajectory is painted in a different shade. The clear greens, lavenders, blues and pale persimmon stand in pleasing contrast with the rough texture and neutral gray of the treated cement floors.
        Editing-room walls are lower than the ceiling, contributing to the feeling of spaciousness and the villagelike atmosphere, according to Mr. Wilson. ''It gives the sense of a larger whole and that you are part of a working organization,'' he said.
        But the space isn't designed only for groups. A garden area at the end of the pedestrian avenue is made for one person to rest or meditate among potted palms, papyrus plants, wooden tables and small pools of smooth black river stones. A daybed invites napping when long shifts run together. On the butter-yellow wall is an arrangement of soothing blue and green art glass plates done by the nonprofit group Alpha Workshops. It is one of two Alpha works commissioned by Lifetime for the new space.
        Other amenities include telephone booths for privacy, lockers and a bench for changing shoes.
        A people-oriented work environment represents a big change for technology-driven industries like broadcasting, where less-than-optimal working conditions long prevailed, Mr. Wilson said.
        ''You didn't need to see the sun. You didn't need to breathe the air. You could be a social misfit, but you were working in TV,'' he said.
        But with advanced technology so ubiquitous, companies will have to offer comfortable working conditions if they want to compete for the best workers, according to Mr. Wilson.
        ''The technology is no longer gee-whiz,'' he said. ''If you are going to attract good talent and hold it, you are going to have to make good workplaces for them.''
        SQUARE FEET: BLUEPRINTS
      