
        The White House on Tuesday defended a decision by the office of the first lady, Laura Bush, not to disclose the removal of a skin cancer tumor on her shin for several weeks, saying she had no duty to do so because she did not hold elected office.
        ''She's got the same right to medical privacy that you do -- she's a private citizen,'' the White House press secretary, Tony Snow, said in a contentious briefing.
        Mr. Snow quoted Mrs. Bush as saying, ''It's no big deal, and we knew it was no big deal at the time.''
        In October, an Associated Press reporter asked Mrs. Bush's office about a bandage seen on her shin at a campaign event; her office said it was covering a sore.
        When reporters saw a new bandage on Mrs. Bush's leg on Monday, her spokeswoman, Susan Whitson, said that in early November the first lady had a cancerous tumor removed in a procedure that eradicated any threat of the cancer spreading because it was found early.
        Mr. Snow said Mrs. Bush had a right to privacy because she was not a public official, even though she was a public persona and campaigned heavily for Republicans this fall. Asked if the administration was sending a mixed signal by keeping her cancer private while stressing the importance of public awareness in fighting cancer, Mr. Snow said: ''O.K., well, we consider it stressed. Absolutely, take care of yourselves. Get tested all the time.''
        Mrs. Bush has advocated the public discussion of cancer. Speaking in St. Louis in October for Breast Cancer Awareness Month, she lamented how decades ago, ''because everyone kept breast cancer a secret, women didn't have regular mammograms or perform breast self-exams, because no one told them to.''
        ''Today,'' she said, ''people do talk about breast cancer -- often to tell stories of triumph.''
        Ms. Whitson said it was possible that Mrs. Bush would now speak about the early detection of her cancer, but either way, ''she is still a private citizen,'' under no obligation to volunteer the information. She added that when Mrs. Bush was first asked about it, she honestly believed that she simply had a sore on her shin. When it did not clear up, she had a biopsy shortly before the election; the result showed a malignant tumor.
        Dr. Richard C. Wender, president of the American Cancer Society, said the form of cancer Mrs. Bush had, a squamous cell carcinoma, was far more easily treated than breast cancer, with an overwhelmingly high recovery rate.
        Dr. Wender said that going public with a cancer diagnosis was a very private decision, and ''I certainly think every public person has the right to make that personal decision in a way they're comfortable with.''
      