
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Military Considers Sending as Many as 35,000 More U.S. Troops to Iraq, McCain Says'' (news article, Dec. 15):
        Senator John McCain says a troop increase should last ''until we can get the situation under control, or until it becomes clear that we can't.''
        Senator McCain: We can't.
        In the 1960s, the United States steadily increased the number of soldiers in Vietnam. It didn't help then. Why would it now?
        Mr. McCain says that unlike the situation with the Vietnam War, Iraq's fighters ''will follow us home.'' This 21st-century domino theory has a big flaw: if we fail in Iraq, the Islamic militants will be too busy fighting in a widespread Sunni-Shiite conflict. That might be an economic threat to the United States because of our dependence on Saudi oil, but it would not be a military or terrorist threat.
        David Levner  Rego Park, Queens, Dec. 15, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Bush Won't Be 'Rushed' on Iraq, but Says He'll Press Maliki'' (news article, Dec. 14):
        Having rushed us into war in Iraq, President Bush won't be rushed out. Too bad it's not the reverse.
        Mr. Bush's justifications for starting the war were false and ever shifting. Now his most recent reason for delaying his decision on a new strategy in Iraq is that he wants Robert M. Gates, the new secretary of defense, ''to get to know people and hear people and to be a part of these deliberations.''
        But Mr. Gates was a member of the Iraq Study Group and got to know and hear from all these ''people'' (unlike Mr. Bush) before being appointed defense secretary.
        Sid Tamm  Newton, Mass., Dec. 14, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Considering that President Bush launched the invasion of Iraq well over three and a half years ago, his declaration that he won't ''be rushed'' on making new strategy decisions about that tormented country seems patently absurd.
        Stephen Jones  Oakland Park, Fla., Dec. 14, 2006
        To the Editor:
        President Bush's decision to delay his announcement of a new strategy for Iraq until early next year is not at all surprising.
        He has followed the same pattern throughout his presidency. Whenever faced with a complex or controversial issue -- taxes, stem cell research, the environment, Medicare, Social Security or weapons of mass destruction -- Mr. Bush has always preferred to seek the advice of a wide range of experts before misrepresenting their conclusions to the American people.
        Dale MacDiarmid  Los Angeles, Dec. 14, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Is it just me, or does anyone else see the pattern of behavior with President Bush's deliberations on charting a new course in Iraq and his runup to the war?
        Faced with facts and recommendations that he cannot or will not accept, Mr. Bush surrounds himself with like-minded thinkers to craft a plan that fits his way of thinking. What good can come from such a flawed process?
        Scott Hight  Chicago, Dec. 14, 2006
        To the Editor:
        Re ''Democrats Plan to Take Control of Iraq Spending'' (front page, Dec. 14):
        I think that is a wonderful idea.
        We have had a Congress that prides itself on cutting taxes and relying on supplemental budgets to finance a costly, ill-conceived war.
        The human cost of the war has been borne by the less affluent young men and women who have been seduced by recruiters with offers of education and career advancement. The truly needy have had large holes in their safety nets.
        If we are indeed in a quagmire, we should all pay more taxes. It has taken us five years to wake up to the fact that our leaders have led us into a costly war that has put us all in danger.
        The young and the poor have carried the main burden of this war. It is time for the rest of us to chip in.
        Susan Stern  Chestnut Hill, Mass., Dec. 14, 2006
      