
        CHASE Manhattan Bank recently began branding city sidewalks with its octagonal logo, making perhaps the most distinctive mark yet in this form of guerrilla marketing.
        Now, Chase is neither the first nor the only company to use graphic projectors to beam commercial messages onto public sidewalks at night, where pedestrians simply cannot help seeing them. Commerce Bank is another. But the Chase logo is so bold, its branches so numerous and its corporate profile so high that it may set an irresistible example.
        Are you beginning to imagine the sidewalks of New York paved from curb to curb after dark in a luminous blanket of logos?
        Section 19-138 of the city's Administrative Code is standing in the way.
        ''It shall be unlawful,'' it says, ''for any person to deface any street by painting, printing or writing thereon, or attaching thereto, in any manner, any advertisement or other printed matter.''
        That goes for advertising being beamed onto the sidewalks, the Department of Transportation said yesterday.
        ''D.O.T. will certainly enforce 19-138 against the use of graphic projectors, since the intent of the rule is to prohibit any advertising on public sidewalks,'' Ted Timbers, a spokesman for the department, said in an e-mail message.
        Some city rules distinguish between advertising signs (directing attention to companies or products that have no connection with the building itself, like a movie ad at a service station) and accessory signs (directing attention, as the Chase logos do, to the business where the sign is situated). Advertising signs are regulated more stringently.
        Transportation officials are not inclined to make such a distinction for sidewalks, Mr. Timbers said. ''The intent of 19-138 is to prohibit defacing of public sidewalks as well as 'advertising' in the general sense,'' he said.
        Nor, he said, could the department envision charging advertisers for the privilege of beaming their messages under foot.
        By its own count, Chase installed graphic projectors inside about two dozen branches in the city as part of an overall refurbishing effort. ''We're trying to create a brighter, friendlier feel to our branches,'' said Thomas A. Kelly, a spokesman for the bank. Projectors were installed where foot traffic and neighborhood context warranted them, he said.
        ''We see kids jumping in and out of the octagon,'' Mr. Kelly said. ''It's a fun thing. We're using architectural lighting rather than stage lighting, so it's not so bright.''
        But the octagons certainly could be big. Outside the Chase branch at Columbus Avenue and 72nd Street, one of the blue and white emblems stretched 8 feet 4 inches across the sidewalk and was 5 feet 10 inches wide -- nearly 50 square feet. That's a lot of logo.
        ''In a time when attention spans are shrinking to new lows, retailers and manufacturers continue to search for ways to make their messages pop up to consumers,'' said the Web site of Articulight, the maker of the projectors at the Chase branch. Among the ''unused surfaces'' ripe for advertising, the company said, are building facades and asphalt.
        After stepping through a Chase logo the other night, Amber Harris, a graphic designer and an Upper West Sider, said, ''I think we've run out of places to brand.''
        On the other hand, she allowed, if she were a Chase customer looking for a branch in an unfamiliar neighborhood, ''I'd be pretty happy to see this.'' She likened the phenomenon to the Batman signal.
        The Municipal Art Society takes a dimmer view of signs created by ''corporate vandals who seem to view sidewalks as nothing more than canvas for their own style of graffiti,'' said Vanessa Gruen, the organization's director of special projects.
        ''That the latest version of sidewalk defacement is projected rather than physically attached does not differentiate it from stickers, paint, etched names or any other age-old form of sidewalk graffiti,'' she said. ''All are a visual blight.''
        Scott M. Stringer, the Manhattan borough president, acknowledged competing interests.
        ''This is the media capital of the world,'' he said. ''I would not want to change one legal sign in Times Square. But not every neighborhood should be turned into one huge advertising campaign.''
        Mr. Stringer added: ''Chase is everywhere. This is a marketing plan that doesn't happen by accident. Three or four large corporations will take over the streets and others will follow.''
        But maybe not now.
        Until yesterday, Chase planned to install more graphic projectors around its branches. When the bank learned of the Transportation Department's intentions, Mr. Kelly said, it decided to turn them all off instead. ''We always want to comply with city laws,'' he said.
        So much for a guerrilla campaign, no matter how brilliant.
        BLOCKS
      