
        A WEEK after stunning Madison Avenue by tossing out the results of a lengthy and expensive search for new advertising agencies, Wal-Mart Stores has decided to ask four of the five finalists from the previous review to take another shot at the $580 million assignment.
        One invitee, however, has declared, to borrow an old song title, ''Thanks a lot, but no thanks.'' The agency is GSD&M in Austin, Tex., part of the Omnicom Group, which has created campaigns for Wal-Mart since 1987.
        ''I want to thank Wal-Mart for inviting us to re-pitch the business,'' Roy Spence, president at GSD&M, said in a statement yesterday. ''I have decided to decline.
        ''We helped build Wal-Mart from $11 billion in sales to $312 billion,'' said Mr. Spence, who worked closely for many years with Sam Walton, the founder of Wal-Mart.
        ''We declare victory,'' he added. ''And we are moving on.''
        The decision by GSD&M leaves three original finalists remaining in the second search, which Wal-Mart hopes to complete before contracts with GSD&M and its other longtime agency, Bernstein-Rein, expire on Jan. 31.
        ''We expect to complete the review fairly quickly and have something to announce after the first of the year,'' said Linda Blakley, a Wal-Mart spokeswoman in Bentonville, Ark.
        The other finalist not participating in Round 2 is Draft FCB in Chicago, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies, which Wal-Mart selected in late October as one of its two new agencies, along with Carat USA in New York, part of the Aegis Group. The agency changes were part of a strategy shift at Wal-Mart, the nation's largest retailer, to compete more effectively against rivals like Kohl's, J. C. Penney and Target.
        Wal-Mart shocked the ad industry Dec. 7 by disclosing that it would cancel the results of the review and bar Draft FCB from participating in the new selection process. The change of corporate mind came three days after Wal-Mart fired two marketing executives, Julie Roehm and Sean Womack, who were instrumental in determining the outcome of the first review.
        Wal-Mart dismissed Ms. Roehm and Mr. Womack, who worked for her, after deciding they had a personal relationship that violated ethics policies against fraternizing with subordinates, according to people briefed on the matter. Ms. Roehm, who was senior vice president for marketing communications, and Mr. Womack, who was vice president for brand architecture, have denied any wrongdoing. The two executives, both of whom are married, described their relationship as professional and not personal.
        Wal-Mart also determined that Ms. Roehm had violated company policy, these people said, by accepting gifts, including meals, from the agencies taking part in the review. Ms. Roehm denied that last week, saying, ''We showed no favoritism.''
        When Wal-Mart told executives at Draft FCB they could not participate in the second review, the company told executives at Carat USA they would be invited back. The executives at Carat USA, which specializes in media planning and buying, accepted the invitation.
        The two other finalists that agreed to come back are the Martin Agency in Richmond, Va., another Interpublic agency, which creates campaigns for advertisers like Geico and the Newspaper Association of America, and Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide in New York, part of the WPP Group, which creates ads for marketers like American Express and I.B.M.
        The short amount of time before the expiration of the Wal-Mart contracts with its current agencies, as well as the burden upon the other agencies of working on second presentations during the holiday season, contributed to the decision by Wal-Mart and its consultant in the search, Select Resources International, to invite previous participants rather than expand the field.
        There had been debate inside GSD&M about whether to take part in the second review if invited to do so, according to agency executives familiar with the discussions, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly.
        On one side of the ledger were the long, strong ties between GSD&M and Wal-Mart, the executives said, and the possibility the agency could fight its way back onto the roster with Draft FCB out of the picture.
        On the other side, the executives said, were factors that included a reluctance to subject employees to another arduous review, particularly around the holidays, and feelers the agency has already received from other retailers.
        Ms. Blakley of Wal-Mart, asked for a reaction to the GSD&M decision, replied: ''We appreciate the many years of marketing work we did together. We wish them well.''
        There was also a lively discussion inside Interpublic about whether Martin ought to take part in Round 2 if asked back, according to executives there who spoke anonymously for the same reason as the GSD&M executives.
        On the one hand, the executives said, Interpublic is reluctant to risk a second high-profile repudiation if Martin is not picked again. Interpublic managers had red faces after Wal-Mart called off the decision to hire Draft FCB. Although no contract had been signed, they had ardently celebrated the assignment as a sign that comeback efforts at Interpublic, plagued by account losses and accounting irregularities, were bearing fruit.
        (One example of the fallout for Interpublic from Wal-Mart's decision was a decision by the editors of the trade publication Advertising Age, who had selected Draft FCB as 2006 agency of the year, to rescind their choice.)
        On the other hand, the executives said, as stewards of a publicly traded company, Interpublic managers cannot allow wounded pride to overrule their duty to shareholders to pursue new business. Interpublic shares fell 6.4 percent on Dec. 7 after Wal-Mart declared the review would be done over; they closed yesterday at $11.95, up 0.4 percent, or 5 cents, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
        In the meantime, Bernstein-Rein and GSD&M are continuing to work for Wal-Mart as the retailer seeks to stimulate sluggish sales growth during this crucial shopping season.
        ''The Christmas and holiday marketing plans were developed some time ago and we have a strong marketing team executing on those plans,'' Ms. Blakley of Wal-Mart said.
        Bernstein-Rein is leading the effort on a big holiday campaign carrying the theme ''Be bright,'' which began with ads that sought to burnish Wal-Mart's image as a place to buy better-quality, pricier products like flat-screen TV sets and home furnishings by the designer Colin Cowie.
        The initial ''Be bright'' ads did not include prices for the merchandise or play up Wal-Mart mainstays like rollbacks, the company's term for price cuts. John Fleming, chief marketing officer at Wal-Mart, subsequently decided the ads ought to address the longtime Wal-Mart selling point of lower prices.
        As a result, ads scheduled to appear this weekend in publications like Parade will present prices along with the merchandise.
        Bernstein-Rein, based in Kansas City, Mo., has worked for Wal-Mart since 1974. The agency was eliminated from the first review in August, during an early winnowing of the field. There had been speculation in recent days about an invitation to participate in the second round.
        But after discussions between Bernstein-Rein executives and Mr. Fleming, it was determined that ''for both of us, it wasn't in the best interest going forward'' for the agency to try again, said Neil Neumeyer, a spokesman at Bernstein-Rein.
        ''Ever since Aug. 8, when we first heard the news, we've been moving on,'' Mr. Neumeyer said. ''Now, we can continue to do that.''
        THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
      