
        William Z. Salcer, who survived a Nazi concentration camp and later made a fortune by inventing things in the United States, including a plastic lace tablecloth, died on Dec. 6 in Manhattan. He was 82.
        The cause was leukemia, his granddaughter Donna Z. Rubenstone said.
        Mr. Salcer's eventful life also included designing and fabricating tanks in preparation for Israel's war for independence, starting Israel's first rubber plant and, in 1994, patenting a new and improved roller hockey puck. It was among more than a dozen patents in his name.
        At his funeral, Rabbi Allan Schranz of Sutton Place Synagogue in Manhattan said that ''survivor'' was not quite the word to describe Mr. Salcer. ''He was a thriver,'' the rabbi declared.
        William Zev Salcer was born on June 4, 1924, into a wealthy family in the Czechoslovak village of Neporazda. As a youth, he saw his world disintegrate along with the European map.
        Hitler and other European leaders had carved up Czechoslovakia in 1938, and Mr. Salcer's boyhood hometown of Jelsava was suddenly part of Hungary. He went to live with an uncle in Budapest. Jews were banned from universities, so he worked furiously to earn the equivalent of a university engineering degree in high school.
        He worked as a welder's helper in Budapest until illness forced him to return to Jelsava. In 1944, he was confined to a Jewish ghetto and assigned to help repair tanks.
        As the Russians approached, he and other Jews were force-marched to the Mauthausen-Gusen concentration camp in Austria. He was kept in a cold tent with almost no food or water.
        After the Americans liberated him, Mr. Salcer returned to Jelsava with his sister, now Lily Gero, whom he had found against great odds. He also located the woman who would become his wife for 61 years, Katarina Kellner. Both women had been at Auschwitz.
        In addition to his wife and sister, both of Manhattan, Mr. Salcer is survived by his daughter, Naomi Fox, of Fort Lee, N.J.; his son, Ron, of Manhattan Beach, Calif., five grandchildren and one great-grandson.
        Mr. Salcer could not trace his family's lost fortune in Jelsava and faced sharp anti-Semitism. The last straw was being drafted by the Czechoslovak Army.
        Fleeing, he followed a circuitous route to Palestine, where he did odd jobs, picked oranges, shoveled coal, did welding on a bridge (until Arab snipers stopped the work) and got a job in a machine shop in Tel Aviv. There, he rebuilt station wagons into garbage trucks and welded steel over bus windows to stop gunfire.
        He was recruited by the underground defense group Haganah to apply these skills to fabricating tanks in secret. ''They were heavy, but very fast and flexible and could fit up to five men,'' Mr. Salcer said in an interview with his granddaughter.
        He next served in the new Israeli Air Force, working on jet engines as well as designing irrigation projects. In 1952, after his discharge, Mr. Salcer and a partner designed and started a rubber factory, using loans from the Israeli government. He was elected president of Israel's manufacturing association at 28.
        After Israeli and Egyptian forces clashed in the Suez crisis in 1956, Mr. Salcer, worried that Israel would be subsumed by wars, decided to emigrate to the United States. He settled in Queens and began visiting department stores to come up with a new profitable product.
        He decided Americans needed plastic lace tablecloths. Registering five patents, he persuaded Czechoslovak investors to finance the venture. He also invented a plastic display stand for displaying earrings that became ubiquitous.
        Now wealthy, he sold the company, traveled in Europe, started another company to sell plastic molding that he designed to look like chrome, then sold that enterprise, too, for a big profit. He did the same thing with his next company, which sold a material to reface cabinets.
        After his son, Ron, became an agent for hockey players, Mr. Salcer dreamed up a new puck for roller hockey and a new stick for ice hockey. The puck still sells briskly, but the manufacturer allowed flaws in the stick, reducing sales. Mr. Salcer sued and won.
      