
        Cyril Crutchfield returned to the renovated Superdome on Saturday to watch two players whom he groomed into future stars. But it was a distant viewing. He sat in the stands while they performed on the field, wearing unfamiliar colors, playing for a new team from a distant city, celebrating a Louisiana state championship with different fans, holding up a trophy that will go into someone else's trophy case.
        Crutchfield coached Port Sulphur High to the Class 1A title in 2002 and finished second in 2001. He had expected the Bronchos to challenge for titles again in 2005 and 2006, until Hurricane Katrina destroyed his high school, his plans and much of everything else in lower Plaquemines Parish.
        He now coaches the newly formed South Plaquemines High, which was consolidated from the ravaged communities of Port Sulphur, Buras and Boothville-Venice. The defiantly named Hurricanes reached the playoffs this year in a season of renewal, but lost in the second round, leaving Crutchfield watching Christmas specials instead of videotape of upcoming opponents.
        On Saturday, instead of preparing for their own title game, Crutchfield and about 50 fans from Port Sulphur made the 40-mile drive to New Orleans to watch quarterback Randall Mackey and running back Jamal Recasner, former Port Sulphur High teammates, win a Class 4A state title for Bastrop High, located 300 miles to the north, near the Arkansas border.
        ''I'm a little shaky,'' Crutchfield acknowledged before the game. ''I'm happy for these kids. I want them to win a championship. But I'm disappointed things are not how we would like it to be, with everybody home, everything normal.''
        He wore a pale blue South Plaquemines shirt, while a smattering of others in the crowd of 36,663 wore the purple, gold and black football jackets and jerseys of ruined Port Sulphur High. The awkwardness of the moment was evident to Crutchfield's friends as he grew quiet and began shaking his legs nervously.
        ''I know it's hard on you,'' said Rodney Bartholomew, a sheriff's deputy who escorts the South Plaquemines team bus. ''It's hard on me, too.''
        Mackey's mother, Carla Ragas, wearing a red and blue Bastrop jersey, came by to say hello. ''I love this man,'' she said of Crutchfield.
        Her eldest son, Josh Mackey, had been named the most valuable player of the 2002 championship game for Port Sulphur. ''If not for Crutch, my kids wouldn't have played sports.'' Ragas said.
        Her younger son Randall was voted Bastrop's most outstanding player in the 28-14 victory against Archbishop Shaw of suburban New Orleans. Recasner ran with fierce determination and later gripped the championship trophy as securely as he had gripped the ball.
        The moment was bittersweet for Crutchfield. For Mackey and Recasner, the state title was as redemptive as it was seemingly inevitable during a 15-0 season. For Bastrop's critics, the victory was polarizing.
        A year ago, Mackey and Recasner were among five evacuees from Port Sulphur who won a state championship at Bastrop, only to have it revoked in an episode that demonstrated how post-hurricane opportunism accompanied compassion for the displaced.
        The Louisiana High School Athletic Association ruled that the players had been illegally contacted and recruited from evacuation shelters. Recasner, Mackey, his mother and a Bastrop assistant were also accused of filing false affidavits, saying that the players had been brought to Bastrop by their parents, not by coaches.
        Two of the five players have since graduated, while another returned to Plaquemines Parish. Mackey, 16, and Recasner, 17, were initially declared ineligible for this season. Later, the state association reduced their suspensions to two games each, saying students should not be punished twice for the misbehavior of adults.
        Mackey, a junior, had started at quarterback as an eighth and ninth grader for Port Sulphur. He said he considered Crutchfield a father figure, someone who stressed education, taught him how to throw a football and helped him begin to overcome painful shyness. At Port Sulphur, Mackey spoke with a slight stutter and was too reticent even to call ''hut'' to begin a play.
        Some of that reserve deepened after Katrina. The young man who arrived in Bastrop was so traumatized that he appeared ''shellshocked,'' according D'Carlos Holmes, an assistant at Bastrop who formerly coached at Port Sulphur High. At first, he said, Mackey would lay in the bed of Holmes's pickup truck, appearing zombie-like, talking to no one.
        ''I was close to taking him back to his momma,'' who had evacuated to Texas, Holmes said. ''Now it's amazing. Sometimes you get tired of hearing him talk.''
        Last August, when Mackey was at first declared ineligible for this entire season, he stayed up all night, crying, and began saying desperate things that worried his mother, who had moved to Bastrop the previous fall.
        Randall Mackey stomped around in the backyard, Ragas said, saying, ''If I can't play football, watch what's going to happen.''
        She said she worried that he might try to hurt himself or someone else.
        ''Don't do anything crazy,'' Ragas told her son.
        But that seemed ages ago as Mackey played with elusive grace Saturday. When Archbishop Shaw had Mackey trapped, somehow he escaped. He broke tackles like a running back. Unlike many high school quarterbacks, he threw accurately on the run, finishing an unblemished season in which he completed 107 of 185 passes for 2,067 yards, 27 touchdowns and 4 interceptions.
        Of ordinary size at 5 feet 11 inches and 190 pounds, Mackey possesses a languid whip of an arm. His first pass, an incompletion, sailed 65 yards. In the second quarter, he rifled a short sideline pass that eluded a cornerback and became a 23-yard touchdown.
        ''One of the best players I've ever seen,'' Scott Bairnsfather, the Shaw coach, said.
        Recasner, a 5-10, 205-pound senior, rushed for 143 yards and gave Bastrop a 22-7 lead in the fourth quarter on a 69-yard touchdown run. Two defenders hit him but could not bring him down; a third grabbed his jersey but could not hold on. As Recasner sprinted for the end zone, Crutchfield stood and raised his fist, but the moment was tinged with a special poignancy.
        As an eighth grader, Recasner had played on Port Sulphur's 2002 championship team. He was the final member of that team still playing in high school. As Recasner scored, tears came to the eyes of Wayne Williamson, who wore a Port Sulphur jersey in the stands.
        ''I can't believe we lost that,'' said Williamson, a sheriff's deputy who has long escorted the team bus, first for Port Sulphur and now for South Plaquemines.
        ''I feel good for him,'' Williamson said of Recasner. Still, he seemed melancholy. ''If all our kids came back, we'd be playing here,'' Williamson said. ''I believe that.''
        The Port Sulphur fans stood and cheered as Mackey received the outstanding player award and Recasner hoisted the championship trophy. It was a cathartic moment for Bastrop, and Mackey later declared that the troubling 2005 season ''was gone to me.''
        To its critics, the school has shown a pattern of abuse of state rules. Last year, in an incident not involving Katrina, Bastrop also used an ineligible player from Mississippi whose mother never moved to Louisiana. That infraction alone was enough to strip the school of its 2005 title, the state athletic association ruled.
        ''The bottom line is, they were wrong as adults to do what they did,'' John Carr, the coach of rival Ouachita High in Monroe, La., said of Bastrop's recruiting of the Port Sulphur players. ''To say it was just for the good of the kids is hogwash.''
        Ouachita has acknowledged that it asked the state association to investigate Bastrop. The two schools play in the same league, and the rivalry has grown corrosive. Bastrop refused to shake hands with Ouachita after a recent playoff victory. Earlier this season, a junior high game between the two schools was canceled because Ouachita's safety could not be guaranteed in Bastrop, Carr said.
        However Bastrop is viewed by others, Coach Brad Bradshaw said his team considered itself a two-time state champion. Noting that his players still had their championship rings from 2005, he said he told them: ''The only thing that matters is the jewelry.''
        Holmes, the Bastrop assistant who was previously at Port Sulphur, said: ''When I went and got those kids, I did it in good faith. Those are my kids. They were in need.''
        In falsifying an affidavit, though, Holmes said, ''I should have used better judgment.''
        Now that his career is over, Recasner will return to Port Sulphur to graduate at South Plaquemines High, said his mother, Dorita Black, who has been living apart from her son.
        ''As soon as it says Bastrop state champs, back to South Plaquemines, baby,'' Black said recently. . ''I can't sleep, I can't rest. I'm about to have a heart attack. I can't take it.''
        After the 2005 season, Mackey said he would consider playing at South Plaquemines during his senior year, in deference to Crutchfield. Now he plans to stay in Bastrop, Ragas said. It is hard to consider going back to lower Plaquemines, she said, when there is little to go back to.
        Last summer, Mackey said, he grew despondent when he returned to Port Sulphur and found only trash and the remains of his dog on the street where he once lived.
        ''I don't want to see none of that stuff,'' he said. ''I want to live my life like it is now.''
        Crutchfield said he understood.
        ''I'm glad they got a chance to play somewhere,'' he said of Mackey and Recasner. ''Do I think some things were done wrong? Yes. We're on the other end of the stick. It didn't work out for us. Bastrop benefited and possibly the kids did. The most important thing is the kids. You don't want to be selfish.''
        FOOTBALL
      