
        Nearly two weeks ago, on Nov. 30, Taco Bell officials learned that several customers had become sick with a virulent strain of E. coli after eating at one of the chain's restaurants in New Jersey.
        By the following Monday, Dec. 4, it became clear that the outbreak was spreading beyond that restaurant, in South Plainfield in central New Jersey, and Taco Bell issued its first public statement, saying it had closed nine restaurants in New Jersey and New York.
        Two days later, Taco Bell appeared to have a major break: Preliminary tests by a private laboratory showed that green onions were the probable culprit, and it ordered them out of all 5,800 restaurants nationwide. Now, almost a week after saying they had zeroed in on a possible cause of the outbreak, investigators say that those early indications appear to be wrong and that they may never learn the cause with certainty.
        More sophisticated testing of the green onion samples -- the required next step -- actually found no traces of E. coli O157:H7. Although additional testing continues, the authorities now say the source of the E. coli outbreak could be any number of ingredients used by Taco Bell, but probably not onions.
        ''Of these ingredients, those consumed raw are of particular interest,'' the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said in a news release yesterday.
        At this point, although the cause of the illness is not known, health officials agree that Taco Bell is the source of the outbreak.
        Such twists in an investigation, which can confuse the public, are not unusual when trying to track down the cause of food-borne illnesses, a search that can be complicated by discarded evidence, gaps in victims' memories and false positive tests.
        In October, a few weeks after an E. coli outbreak from spinach killed three and sickened more than 200, a California grower recalled 8,500 cartons of green leaf lettuce after the bacterium was found in the irrigation water. Yet further testing revealed that it was not the same strain that was responsible for the three deaths.
        ''You see a lot of action being taken when there is legitimate uncertainty,'' said Michael R. Taylor, a former head of the Department of Agriculture's food safety agency and a deputy commissioner at the Food and Drug Administration.
        He said companies were inclined to respond quickly to such crises -- even before the testing was completed, in some cases -- because of intensive news coverage and the potential economic losses.
        ''It makes the situation look herky-jerky,'' said Mr. Taylor, who is now a professor of epidemiology and preventive medicine at the University of Maryland medical school.
        By yesterday evening, there were at least 466 confirmed or suspected cases of E. coli linked to Taco Bell. The vast majority of the cases were in New York State, with 369; followed by New Jersey, 80; Pennsylvania, 11; Delaware, 5; and South Carolina, 1.
        Taco Bell officials say they acted promptly to make sure there was no chance that green onions, the potential source of the outbreak, were eaten by anyone else. Since then, company officials say they have taken steps to allay consumer concerns.
        Stores where victims ate have been sanitized and restocked, and the company that supplied produce to Taco Bell in the Northeast, Ready Pac, has been replaced.
        ''We believe we have addressed the uncertainty by the steps we have taken,'' said a spokesman for Taco Bell, Rob Poetsch.
        Yet as the company looks ahead, investigators have to turn to other leads.
        Michael P. Doyle, the director of the Center for Food Safety at the University of Georgia, and other experts described the initial rapid-screening tests that pointed to the green onions this way:
        A sample of green onions is placed in a culture and left for several hours. If the virulent strain of E. coli O157:H7 is present, it will multiply. The test relies on antibodies to detect the presence of the bacterium. One is simply a control to show that the test is working, and the second indicates the presence of E. coli. A false positive result can occur because certain bacteria react to the antibodies the same way E. coli does.
        If the initial test is positive, more sophisticated chemical and antibody testing taking about two and a half days is done to confirm the results.
        Both the state and the federal governments said yesterday that they were continuing to test samples taken from Taco Bell to try to find traces of E. coli.
        So far, none of the samples have tested positive in the more sophisticated tests, except for chopped white onions from the Taco Bell in Deer Park on Long Island that were erroneously labeled green onions. That strain of E. coli was not the one that caused the outbreak.
        While testing for a potential source continues, investigators said they were pursuing less sophisticated methods of tracing the outbreak. Investigators are asking victims what they ate at Taco Bell, and when possible are asking the same questions of companions who did not get sick.
        ''If you do enough of those, you begin to identify the ingredients that are associated with illness,'' said Dr. David Acheson, the chief medical officer for the Food and Drug Administration's Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition. ''Certain things drop out. The pool gets smaller and smaller.''
        As the search continued, the prevailing attitude among a trickle of customers at a Taco Bell in the Newport Center Mall in Jersey City seemed to be: We've heard the news, and we don't care.
        ''It didn't really bother me,'' said Randy McLain, a data processing consultant from Norman, Okla., who was the lone customer at lunchtime. ''I figure it's all safe, and they've taken care of it,'' he said.
        ''Do you notice there's no one else here but me?''
      