
        Love him or hate him, Bode Miller, the skier so famous for his candor and his disregard for the Olympics, is on top of the mountain again. In a season that he has said may be his last, Miller is taking aim at records on the World Cup circuit, and he is doing it against deeper fields and on harder courses than those at the Winter Games.
        Miller, 29, won his 23rd career World Cup race Friday at Val Gardena, Italy, moving him into a tie for 12th on the career victories list. He could catch Phil Mahre, who is seventh and the top American on that list, with 27 victories.
        With two victories this season, Miller is bidding to transform his medal-less performance last February in the Turin Olympics into merely the undignified low point of his career, rather than the end of it.
        On Saturday at the prestigious Val Gardena downhill course, Miller watched his young teammate Steve Nyman collect his first World Cup victory.
        Yesterday Miller responded by finishing second in the World Cup giant slalom at nearby Alta Badia. In keeping with a career-long tendency that many find maddening, Miller has squandered several opportunities for victory this year by crashing or missing gates, a consequence of his refusal to moderate his approach.
        ''He should not be criticized,'' the Croatian standout Ivica Kostelic told The Associated Press last week. ''His style of skiing originates from his lifestyle. This is how he is.''
        But Miller has made some changes this year. After his chief sponsor, the food company Barilla, dumped him in the spring, Miller signed a new contract to endorse Superfund, an international investment firm.
        The company held a party earlier this month in Vail, Colo., where a representative of the company addressed the elephant in the room -- why any company would want its brand associated with an athlete known for never toeing the company line.
        ''Everybody knows he's eccentric, but we want to be associated with the best,'' said Aaron Smith, Superfund's managing director. ''He has tremendous personality and charisma, and is a household name both in the U.S. and in Europe.''
        Miller also has a new ski sponsor, Head, the fifth factory to support him in his nine-year World Cup career. They took him on last May, when others would not, knowing Miller had a reputation for complaining about his equipment.
        ''Of course we knew it would be tough for us, but we took the challenge,'' said Rainer Salzgeber, the Alpine race manager of Head skis. Head signed Miller in part because his legendary fussiness about equipment is a boon to a company's research and development program even if it is a nightmare for the marketing department.
        His new serviceman, who tunes his skis for downhill and super-G events, worked with the 1992 Olympic downhill champion, Patrick Ortlieb.
        In a news release yesterday by the United States ski team, Miller praised a new pair of skis, saying: ''They're a whole bunch better than at the beginning of the season. These skis are a million times better.''
        Miller is racing on a tuned-up knee, having had surgery in the spring to repair lingering cartilage problems associated with a major accident in 2001. The swelling and pain became progressively worse last season.
        ''We got in there and it was as bad as we feared,'' said Dr. Richard Steadman, the world-renowned surgeon who operated on Miller at his clinic in Vail. ''He had a remarkable season last year, considering the cartilage damage on the knee.''
        Miller was reluctant to have the operation, preferring the alternative therapies of Milne Ongley, a controversial healer based in Ensenada, Mexico.
        In his previous World Cup victory this month, Miller won the difficult downhill at Beaver Creek, Colo., despite the distraction of a Slovenian coach who slid across his path -- it was ''just another variable,'' he said after the race.
        That day, the 24-year-old Nyman was third.
        An avid powder skier from Utah, Nyman once helped finance his skiing by doing yard work for Robert Redford, who owns the Sundance Ski Resort where Nyman learned the sport. Last month, Nyman tried to find a primary sponsor by posting a notice on eBay, offering use of a 50-square-centimeter space to corporate advertisers. The highest bid was $19,600. He ended up selling the space for more money outside the auction.
        Nyman's teammate and fellow Utah native, the Olympic gold medalist Ted Ligety, received a seven-figure contract for similar ad space. The disparity between them reflects the premium the American public puts on Olympic success, regardless of World Cup stature.
        There is a lesson in that for Miller as he aims to amend his biography in skiing's history books.
        SKIING
      