
        ''Paradise Redefined,'' at the Lehman College Art Gallery, is a wistful installation by Scherezade Garcia, a New York-based artist born in the Dominican Republic. It is inspired by the real-life stories of members of the Dominican communities in Manhattan and the Bronx, where the artist carried out interviews with residents as source material for her project.
        The installation has an elegant simplicity, consisting of tent structures whose outer covering is a montage of back-lighted photographic images of street scenes -- mostly apartment buildings and bodega storefronts in Washington Heights, home to the city's single largest concentration of people from the Dominican Republic.
        According to Census Bureau figures, there are 532,620 Dominicans in New York City. That makes them the city's second-largest Latin-American immigrant group (Puerto Ricans are the first).
        The installation is concerned with issues of identity and homeland, and the expectations of a better life, which often characterize stories of migration to the United States. Ms. Garcia matches those expectations with the reality, asking her subjects to reflect upon the success and failure of their hopes and dreams.
        The results are both disconcerting and inspiring.
        Graffiti-like drawings overlay the montage imagery, along with religious and cultural symbols and allusions to a tropical landscape. The overall effect is somber and dreamy, even sort of hallucinatory, as the imagery fades in and out of focus depending on the strength and position of the lights inside the tents.
        Snippets of conversations in Spanish emerge from the tents, mingling with ambient sounds -- traffic, music, laughter -- to reflect the vibrant street atmosphere in predominantly Latin neighborhoods of New York City. Sometimes this riotous simultaneity of sounds can be enthralling, evoking a kind of imaginary place bordering on both New York City and the Caribbean. The more you listen, the more you feel yourself being sucked into this world.
        The soothing sounds of breaking surf wash over the room from a nearby video projection of the ocean. The video and several gold inner tubes for tires hanging from the ceiling remind us of the dangerous sea passage across the narrow, shark-infested Mona Straits between Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic, a journey often undertaken on rafts or in small, overloaded boats by Dominicans seeking to enter the United States illegally through Puerto Rico. Many Dominicans have died trying to gain entry to the United States in this way.
        The exhibition also includes, around the walls of the room, colorful, childlike drawings of a black female figure, a composite self-portrait of the artist and her daughter. Sometimes the figure is shown floating in the ocean, sometimes in the sky surrounded by airplanes, alluding to the passage by air or sea between the Dominican Republic and the United States.
        In contrast to the illuminated tents, the drawings have a more upbeat, even utopian edge. The atmosphere is often one of swooning delight, the dainty figure decked out in jewelry and wearing patterned, embroidered dresses and smiling hopefully at the viewer, as if waiting expectantly for things to come. Sometimes a circular bouquet of tropical flowers surrounds her head, like a gilded halo in Byzantine icon paintings. She almost seems saintly.
        The point of the drawings, hard to discern because of the inadequate lighting, seems to be that many Dominicans, no matter what their circumstances, have begun to look at the United States and not the Dominican Republic as their home. Their struggle to adapt and assimilate is gritty and worthy of respect.
        Scherezade: ''Paradise Redefined,'' Lehman College Art Gallery, Lehman College, 250 Bedford Park Boulevard West, the Bronx, through Jan. 6. (718) 960-8731 or at www.lehman.edu/gallery.
        ART REVIEW
      