
        The Jets' starting center, Nick Mangold, lay face down on the turf after his legs were cut out from under him by his teammate Leon Washington, whose missed block was the reason quarterback Chad Pennington was walking to the Metrodome sideline as if in a daze.
        On the second play from scrimmage of a game the Jets had to win to remain in the playoff conversation, Pennington was stripped of the football on a sack by linebacker Napoleon Harris, and an injured Mangold was not moving. Other than that, Coach Eric Mangini, how did you enjoy your team's opening possession?
        The Jets were facing serious adversity, and their uphill climb to the postseason grew steeper after Brad Johnson, the Minnesota Vikings' beleaguered quarterback, connected with receiver Travis Taylor on a 30-yard touchdown pass on the third play after Pennington's fumble.
        The relevance of the rest of the Jets' season hung on how they would respond. They snapped back like rubber bands, forging a 26-13 victory to improve to 8-6 and stay on the periphery of the playoff picture.
        ''Coach had been speaking to us the last couple of weeks about how you act when adverse things happen to you,'' receiver Laveranues Coles said. ''We had something adverse happen,'' he added, referring to the first-possession turnover, ''and we bounced back as a unit. That's what it's all about, being able to bounce back, because everything isn't always going to go perfectly.''
        Mangold, who hurt his left leg when Washington rolled into him while trying to hold off Harris, trotted out for the first play of the Jets' second possession. That was a positive sign. He rebounded nicely and so did Pennington, who completed 7 of 8 passes in the drive for 56 yards -- his lone incompletion coming on a pass he wisely threw away to avoid a sack -- to lead the Jets inside the Vikings' 10.
        Cedric Houston, who has yo-yoed between the starting lineup and the inactive list, took it from there. He scored on a 6-yard run, after a nifty block on linebacker Ben Leber by the rookie fullback Stacy Tutt, who had just been activated from the practice squad.
        Playing against the stingiest run defense in the league, Houston gained 53 yards on 21 carries. That was a yard fewer than the Vikings had allowed, on average, in their first 13 games. The Jets moved the ball efficiently if not effusively; they had only 8 plays from scrimmage that went for negative yardage.
        After his shaky start, Pennington finished with 339 yards passing, spreading his 29 completions among seven receivers.
        ''They had a great game plan,'' Vikings cornerback Antoine Winfield said. ''They kind of spread us out and were rotating personnel and trying to confuse us.''
        Pennington's favorite receiver was Coles, who had been held to seven catches in the previous two games. He bounced back with 12 receptions to equal his career high. In the second quarter, he scored on 21-yard pass from Pennington. In the process Coles went over 1,000 yards receiving for the season.
        Mike Nugent bounced back from an aborted 37-yard attempt in the first quarter to kick four field goals -- from 25, 52, 45 and 20 yards. His adversity arrived in the form of a high snap from James Dearth that the holder, Ben Graham, caught, only to drop the ball while trying to spin the laces. Graham retrieved the loose football and threw an incomplete pass to Nugent.
        The defense bounced back from its awful showing in a 31-13 loss to the Buffalo Bills last weekend. It held the Vikings to a total of 62 yards rushing and limited them to four first downs in the first half. Late in the second quarter, Jets safety Eric Smith was caught out of position on a deep ball that Johnson threw to Troy Williamson, but he rebounded to make a play on the ball in the end zone.
        Two plays after that incompletion, Ryan Longwell missed a 49-yard field goal attempt that would have brought the Vikings to 10 points behind. Instead, the Jets took a 23-7 lead on Nugent's 45-yard field goal with 4 seconds left in the half.
        After finishing 4-12 last year, the Jets have bounced back nicely. With eight victories they are assured of no worse than a .500 record.
        ''It's fun to win,'' Mangini said, ''and to come out and execute after that adversity initially and play team football, play complete football. The win makes me happy, but the way we played as a team makes me even happier.''
        With five minutes left in the fourth quarter, the ball was in the hands of Pennington, and he was looking for Coles. His pass was intercepted by Harris on a play that Coles never had a chance to make. He was sandwiched between linebackers E. J. Henderson and Leber and fell with a thud. For several seconds, he did not move.
        But he walked under his own power, albeit a little shakily, to the sideline.
        That is where he stayed, standing a little bent over, as the Jets went three and out on their last drive.
        To get from the field to the visitor's locker room, the players had to climb 44 steps. For Coles, each one was pure agony.
        He tackled them one at a time, the way the Jets have been conditioned to approach all uphill battles. It was not especially pretty, but Coles ended up where he wanted to be and the Jets wound up one step closer to the postseason.
        EXTRA POINTS
        The Jets' victory was their fifth on the road this season, the most they have managed since 2001  After being elevated to the No. 2 quarterback position for the Buffalo game, the rookie Kellen Clemens was back to No. 3 Sunday, behind Patrick Ramsey  Defensive tackle C. J. Mosley, a sixth-round draft pick of the Vikings last year who was traded to the Jets in training camp, recorded his first sack of the season.
        PRO FOOTBALL
      