
        They slit the rabbit's belly, ripped it open and feasted on the still beating heart. The commandos of the Iraqi Army were celebrating. The Americans had handed over control of Najaf Province.
        On Wednesday, more than three years after the invasion and two years after American forces put down a revolt here by the militia of Moktada al-Sadr, Najaf became the first province under American control to be handed over to the Iraqis. Two previous transfers involved provinces under British control.
        Even as debate continues in Washington about what should be done to help pacify much of the country, especially Baghdad, coalition officials still say they plan to turn over all of Iraq's provinces by the end of next year.
        With the transfer, the Iraqi government gained control over its Eighth Army Division, which has about 10,000 soldiers. Shiite leaders, who control both this province and the national government, have been anxious to get more operational control over the army, which the United States has been laboring to train.
        But security in the sacred city of Najaf was already largely under Iraqi control, as American forces mostly withdrew from the area after putting down an uprising in 2004 by the Sadr militia, known as the Mahdi Army.
        As the center of Shiite scholarship and the home of Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, Iraq's most influential and revered cleric, Najaf has not been plagued with the kind of sectarian violence that is tearing Baghdad apart.
        But there have been fights between Shiite factions, and residents privately express concern that many Mahdi militiamen are still armed and ready to fight if provoked.
        Mowaffak al-Rubaie, Iraq's national security adviser, attended the transfer ceremony and used the trip to meet with Ayatollah Sistani and discuss the problem of militias.
        Briefing reporters after his conversation, he said he had told Ayatollah Sistani of the government's plans to integrate the militias and armed groups in the country's military forces, and said the ayatollah agreed with this goal.
        The local authorities closed all the roads in the city before the transfer ceremony, and while the security situation is relatively stable here, foreigners still had a military escort to travel the five miles from the heliport at the old American military base to the ceremony.
        In a soccer stadium at the heart of the city, the Iraqi Army and troops from the police, border control and fire brigade paraded for more than an hour before a delegation of American and Iraqi military officials.
        Maj. Gen. Kurt A. Cichowski, deputy chief of staff for the coalition forces, who attended the ceremony, said, ''It is a major step forward in improving security and strengthening the authority of the government.''
        There was music and chanting and a karate demonstration. Dozens of new vehicles, many paid for by the occupying forces, were driven around the stadium, adorned with plastic flowers.
        The general public did not attend. Much of the audience was made up of powerful tribal leaders, who sat beneath a sign that read: ''We are the sons of those who drove the British out in 1920.''
        Outside the stadium, foreign military officials said the $137 million spent on reconstruction in the province was beginning to have an impact. They expect that as tourism continues to thrive, driven by the one million pilgrims who visit every year, the economic situation will improve.
        As soldiers paraded by a reviewing grandstand, commandos with their faces blackened gathered for a demonstration of their courage.
        Each man reached into his right pocket, pulled out a frog and bit its head off. They threw the squirming legs to the ground as the group's leader held aloft a live rabbit. He slit the belly and plunged his mouth into the gash. The carcass was then passed around to the rest of the soldiers, who took their own bites.
        It was explained later that this practice was especially popular among Saddam Hussein's feared Fedayeen militia, whose members had done the same thing with live snakes and wolves.
        114 Iraqis Dead in Baghdad
        By The New York Times
        BAGHDAD, Dec. 20 -- Violence continued across the capital on Wednesday. At least 114 Iraqis were killed or found dead, Iraqi officials said.
        Among the dead were a comedian, a law professor, a schoolteacher and the bodyguard of the director of the Central Bank. In the most lethal attack, a suicide bomber blew himself up near Baghdad University's central campus, killing 9 people, including some students, and wounding 29. Six people died in central Baghdad when a car bomb exploded near a bus filled with people on the way to the airport.
        The American military announced that two soldiers were killed by roadside bombs in Baghdad. It also announced the capture of a Sunni insurgent leader in Mosul on Dec. 14. The leader, whom the military did not identify, was responsible for hundreds of civilian deaths and had housed foreign fighters who were to be suicide bombers, the military said.
        In Washington, President Bush signed a bill that extends the Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction, an independent agency that oversees $32 billion in American expenditures on the rebuilding of Iraq, into 2008.
        The office would have gone out of existence next year under a measure that had been pushed by Duncan Hunter, a House Republican from California with presidential ambitions, but he later dropped his opposition to the extension.
      