
        A 65-year-old woman was shot dead in a Bronx apartment yesterday, and the police said they were investigating the possibility that one of her grandsons may have shot her accidentally.
        The police said that the woman, Lydia Santiago, was killed shortly after 5 p.m. when a bullet struck her right arm and then passed through her chest as she was standing in her daughter's apartment at 1054 Manor Avenue in the Soundview section of the Bronx. When officers arrived, the police said, they were told that the bullet had come through a window.
        But last night the police said that they considered the explanation suspicious, and that detectives were questioning Ms. Santiago's four grandsons. They said they were looking into the possibility that one of the boys was playing with a gun that accidentally went off.
        When detectives searched the home after the shooting, they found at least one gun. A police spokesman said charges were likely to be filed against one of the grandsons.
        Friends and neighbors said Ms. Santiago, who is from Puerto Rico, was staying at the apartment to help take care of the boys' mother, who is disabled. They said Ms. Santiago was often seen in the neighborhood, smiling and collecting bottles and cans.
        ''The family was really happy; I was just there yesterday evening,'' said Christina Garcia, a friend. ''I don't think they did this on purpose. The mother was sick and the boys were always trying to help her.''
        Sarah Thomas, 18, who lives next door to the building, said she was walking into her apartment yesterday evening when she saw the boys panicking and yelling for help. When she ran into their apartment, she said, she found Ms. Santiago lying on the floor bleeding.
        ''She was a really sweet lady,'' she said. ''If I was sitting out here with an attitude, she would come over here and tell me to smile. I always used to save all my cans and bottles for her.''
        Correction:  December 19, 2006, Tuesday  An article in some copies on Saturday about the fatal shooting of a 65-year-old woman in the Bronx misstated the given name of a neighbor who found the woman lying on the floor of the family's apartment. She is Saharrah Thomas, not Sarah.
      