
        Having a teaching post at a major university can provide security and collegial stimulation for a composer. Martin Bresnick has used his position as a composition professor at the Yale School of Music to good benefit, nurturing hundreds of students who have moved in all directions, while finding time and space to create a catalog of vibrant, varied and respected works.
        The downside of being based at a university is that a composer can become a little sequestered from the larger public. So for New York concertgoers ''The Essential Martin Bresnick: A 60th Birthday Retrospective'' at Zankel Hall on Saturday night was long overdue. The program was presented by the Yale School of Music.
        Mr. Bresnick has had his share of successes in New York, with pieces played by, among other ensembles, the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center and, just last Tuesday, the Bang on a Can All-Stars. But the concert Saturday night, with performances of six inspired works lovingly played by students and faculty from Yale, made clear that Mr. Bresnick is a major voice.
        In ''B.'s Garlands,'' for eight cellos, the acuteness of Mr. Bresnick's ear for modernistic harmony and texture was unmistakable. The piece, which he conducted, begins with a quietly organic mass of tremulous sound. Yet shards of color, strands of counterpoint and precisely spaced harmonies come shooting through the mists of sound. After this, the Yale Camerata, a choir of about 65 voices, gave a sensitive performance of Three Choral Songs, mystical yet harmonically astringent settings of texts on themes of pain, comfort and war by the 20th-century Israeli poet Yehuda Amichai.
        Mr. Bresnick has kept the title of his 1997 trio for clarinet (David Shifrin), viola (Jesse Levine) and piano (Lisa Moore) a secret. He calls it ***. True to its cryptic nontitle, the mood of the work is deceptively stately. Even when things turn agitated, and descending cascades of piano sonorities play against fidgety duos for viola and clarinet, the elusive music somehow remains eerily calm.
        In ''Grace,'' a 20-minute concerto for two marimbas (Robert van Sice and James Deitz) and chamber orchestra, extended passages of halting rhythms and quizzical restraint are broken up with bursts of precise and telling gestures.
        ''For the Sexes: The Gates of Paradise'' was a tour de force for Ms. Moore, the pianist for whom it was written. As she played music of unnervingly repetitive chords, staggered rhythms and delicate filigrees, Ms. Moore also spoke and sometimes sang lines from the poet William Blake about a man's progress through life. The music precisely accompanied powerfully simple computer animations of Blake's drawings prepared by Puppetsweat Theater. (A DVD of a performance of this work is available on ''The Essential Martin Bresnick,'' a two-disc recording recently released on the Cantaloupe Music label.)
        In ''My Twentieth Century'' Mr. Bresnick again asks musicians to do more than play their instruments. As this wondrous chamber sextet proceeds, with music of melodic riffs and pungent harmonies, the players by turn put aside their instruments to recite a wistfully reflective poem by Tom Andrews with lines like: ''I wasted three years on geometry in the twentieth century''; and ''My brother died in the twentieth century.'' That even the musicians with foreign accents entered so readily into the performance was a testimony to their trust in their teacher's artistry.
        MUSIC REVIEW
      