
        Though they have not signed him, the Yankees are welcoming Kei Igawa to the team this week. Igawa, who has agreed to a five-year, $20 million contract, visited Yankee Stadium yesterday and met with front-office officials for a tour of the ballpark.
        After dinner with his agent last night, Igawa is scheduled for a physical exam today and will have dinner with Manager Joe Torre and General Manager Brian Cashman in Manhattan.
        The Yankees bid $26 million for the right to negotiate with Igawa, a star of the Japanese league who went 14-9 with a 2.97 earned run average for the Hanshin Tigers last season.
        The Yankees have until Dec. 28 to complete their contract agreement with Igawa. They plan to announce the signing of another left-hander, Andy Pettitte, on a conference call with reporters today. Pettitte took his physical Tuesday and has agreed to a one-year, $16 million contract with a 2008 player option for the same amount.
        BACKMAN GETS SECOND CHANCE -- Two years after he was fired by the Arizona Diamondbacks just four days following his hiring, Wally Backman was announced as manager of the South Georgia Peanuts, based in Albany, in the independent South Coast League.
        Backman was hired by Arizona on Nov. 1, 2004, then was dismissed after reports he had been arrested twice and struggled with financial problems. The South Georgia team in the six-team league will not have a major league affiliation. (AP)
        PERSONAL INFORMATION STOLEN -- The police have found personal information on the White Sox slugger Jim Thome and Mets outfielder Moises Alou at the home of a man charged with identity theft.
        David Dright, 38, will face 27 counts of identity theft involving ''ordinary people'' who live in Lake County outside Chicago, said Patricia Fix, chief deputy of the high-tech crime unit for the Lake County state's attorney's office.
        Fix said a search of Dright's home Tuesday also turned up personal information on almost 90 retired and current ballplayers, including Thome and Alou. The information apparently came from trash bins outside the sports agency SFX Baseball Inc. in Northbrook, Ill. (AP)
        AROUND THE MAJORS -- Second baseman Marcus Giles was reunited with his older brother, Brian, on their hometown team, the Padres. Marcus Giles got a one-year deal, with a club option for 2008.  The Braves agreed to a one-year contract with the former Mets infielder Chris Woodward. (AP)
        BASEBALL
      