
        The Yankees understand the value of left-handed starters, and they took steps toward formally securing two yesterday. Andy Pettitte was en route to New York for a physical exam to complete his new contract, and the Yankees agreed to a five-year, $20 million deal with the Japanese star Kei Igawa.
        With Pettitte and Igawa to go with Randy Johnson, the Yankees could have three left-handers in their rotation. The rival Boston Red Sox were 25-31 in games started against left-handers last season.
        On Dec. 8, Pettitte agreed to a contract for one year and $16 million with a 2008 player option for the same amount. Pettitte then went on a hunting trip with his father. His agent, Randy Hendricks, said in an e-mail message that Pettitte was flying to New York yesterday. ''I think he should get the physical on Tuesday,'' Hendricks said.
        The Yankees will hold a news conference announcing Pettitte's signing later in the week. It will be a homecoming for Pettitte, who won four championships with the Yankees from 1996 to 2000.
        Pettitte pitched for his hometown Houston Astros the last three seasons, reaching the World Series once. The Yankees won no pennants in that time, and the team captain, Derek Jeter, kept in contact with Pettitte this winter, hoping Pettitte would choose to return.
        At an event in Chelsea in Manhattan yesterday for his Turn 2 Foundation, Jeter said he did not have to persuade Pettitte to come back. ''He has been here before, so you don't have to sell him on New York,'' Jeter said.
        Igawa's signing is contingent on his passing a physical and is unlikely to be announced until next week. The Yankees bid $26 million for his negotiating rights, a sum that will be paid to Igawa's Japanese team, the Hanshin Tigers, when the deal becomes official. The $26 million is not subject to the luxury tax. To the Yankees, Igawa's contract will be a bargain if he approaches his success in Japan, where he was 14-9 with a 2.97 earned run average last season.
        BASEBALL: ROUNDUP
      