
        THE casino at Yonkers Raceway opened for business in mid-October amid unfinished construction and a dispute between management and horse owners. Eight weeks later, the gambling site appears to have hit the jackpot. Figures released by the State Lottery Division show that the raceway is the top earner of the eight racetracks with slot machines in the state.
        Empire City Gaming at Yonkers Raceway earned $35.6 million from Oct. 11, the day the casino opened, through Dec. 8, well above the other seven tracks that offer electronic casino games. The second-highest amount earned was $19.2 million at Saratoga Gaming and Raceway. A portion of the Yonkers earnings, $19.2 million, will be allotted to state education under the conditions set forth by the State Legislature when it approved electronic gambling at racetracks in 2001. Saratoga's education portion will be $10.2 million.
        ''We're happy that things seem to be off to a good start,'' said Timothy Rooney Jr., the raceway's general counsel and son of the owner, Timothy J. Rooney.
        The opening of the $240 million casino transformed the Yonkers Raceway from an outdated harness track that faced closing into an increasingly popular destination for gamblers eager to try their luck on the 3,679 video-lottery machines housed over two floors. With a second building scheduled to be completed by the end of this month, the casino will eventually have 5,500 machines.
        On a recent late Saturday afternoon, the casino was filled with visitors playing video-lottery-game machines like Big Money and Alien Attack, which provide electronic versions of popular casino games like poker, before heading to an area called Redemption to cash in their earnings.
        Toni Ricciardi, a Yonkers native who was playing the machines with her mother-in-law and adult daughter, said that when she was a child, it was horses that drew families to the track.
        ''I remember coming to the races and it would be absolutely packed, but nowadays this is what appeals to me more,'' she said, pointing to the rows of video-lottery machines lined up behind her, with their cacophony of bells, chimes and rattles.
        Others said they were tempted by proximity. ''Who wants to sit behind the wheel of your car and drive to Atlantic City?'' asked Joe Gentile, a Yonkers resident and former croupier in Las Vegas and elsewhere.
        Mr. Rooney said he hoped that the casino's success would rekindle interest in harness racing, which resumed Nov. 17 after the racetrack was closed for 510 days to rebuild it. The shutdown angered the Standardbred Owners Association, which claimed the extended delays led to economic hardship for the hundreds of jockeys and horse owners forced to compete at other tracks during the interim. But ''that's all water under the bridge now,'' Mr. Rooney said.
        Two floors above the casino, horse-racing fans gathered to watch the trotters and pacers compete. Among those watching was Carmelo Calderon, of Mount Vernon, who said he had been coming to the track for decades. Mr. Calderon said he was neither interested in nor tempted by the frenzied activity below.
        ''I come for the horses,'' he said. ''If they don't have horses, they won't see me, and my money will stay in the bank.''
        UPDATE
      